
THE MASTER AT COSSIPORE

> Wednesday, December 23, 1885

**Master moved to Cossipore**

ON FRIDAY, DECEMBER 11, Sri Ramakrishna was moved to a beautiful house
at Cossipore, a suburb of Calcutta. The house was situated in a garden
covering about five acres of land and abounding in fruit trees and
flowering plants. Here the final curtain fell on the Master\'s life.

At Cossipore he set himself with redoubled energy to the completion of
the work of spiritual ministration he had begun long before at
Dakshineswar. Realizing that the end of\' his physical life was
approaching, he gave away his spiritual treasures without stint to one
and all. He was like one of those fruit-sellers who bring their fruit to
the market-place, bargain at first about the prices, but then toward
sunset, when the market is about to close, give away the fruit
indiscriminately. Here his disciples saw the greatest manifestation of
his spiritual powers.

**Predicting his passing away**

Here they saw the fulfilment of his prophecies about his own end: \"I
shall make the whole thing public before I go.\" \"When people in large
numbers come to know and whisper about the greatness of this body, then
the Mother will take it back.\" \"The devotees will be sifted into inner
and outer circles toward the end.\" And so on. Here he predicted that a
band of young disciples, with Narendranath as their leader, would in due
course renounce the world and devote themselves to the realization of
God and the service of humanity.

The main building at Cossipore had two storeys, with three rooms below
and two above. The Master occupied the central hall of the upper storey;
a small room to the left was used at night by his attendants. To the
right of the hall was an open balcony where Sri Ramakrishna sometimes
sat or walked. On the ground floor, a hall just below the Master\'s and
a small room to the right of it were used by the devotees, and a small
room to the extreme left was occupied by the Holy Mother. In the garden
compound were some outbuildings, two reservoirs, and pleasant walks. Sri
Ramakrishna breathed more freely in the open air of the new place.

**The companion of devotees**

Almost all the devotees had gathered by this time. They had started
coming to him in 1881. By the end of 1884 Sarat and Śaśi had become
known to the Master, and since their college examinations in the middle
of 1885 they had been visiting him almost daily. Girish Ghosh had first
met the Master in September 1884 at the Star Theatre. Since the
beginning of the following December he had been a constant visitor. And
it was during the latter part of December 1884 that Sarada Prasanna
first visited the Master at the Dakshineswar temple. Subodh and Kshirode
first visited him in August 1885.

The young devotees had taken up their quarters at the garden house to
tend Sri Ramakrishna, although many of them visited their own homes
every now and then. The householders came to see the Master almost every
day, and some of them occasionally spent the night.

**Master\'s love for devotees**

On the morning of December 23 Sri Ramakrishna gave unrestrained
expression to his love for the devotees. He said to Niranjan, \"You are
my father: I shall sit on your lap.\" Touching Kalipada\'s chest, he
said, \"May your inner spirit be awakened!\" He stroked Kalipada\'s chin
affectionately and said, \"Whoever has sincerely called on God or
performed his daily religious devotions will certainly come here.\" In
the morning two ladies received his special blessing. In a state of
samādhi he touched their hearts with his feet. They shed tears of joy.
One of them said to him, weeping, \"You are so kind!\" His love this day
really broke all bounds. He wanted to bless Gopal of Sinthi and said to
a devotee, \"Bring Gopal here.\"

It was evening. Sri Ramakrishna was absorbed in contemplation of the
Mother of the Universe. After awhile he began to talk very softly with
some of the devotees. Kāli, Chunilal, M., Navagopal, Śaśi, Niranjan, and
a few others were present.

MASTER (to M.): \"Buy a stool for me. What will it cost?\"

M: \"Between two and three rupees.\"

MASTER: \"If a small wooden seat costs only twelve *ānnās*, why should
you have to pay so much for a stool?\"

M: \"Perhaps it won\'t cost so much.\"

MASTER: \"Tomorrow is Thursday. The latter part of the afternoon is
inauspicious. Can\'t you come before three o\'clock?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. I shall.\"

MASTER: \"Well, can you tell how long it will take me to recover from
this illness?\"

1.  \"It has been aggravated a little and will take some days.\" MASTER:
    \"How long?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Perhaps five to six months.\"

Hearing this, Sri Ramakrishna became impatient, like a child, and said:
\"So long? What do you mean?\"

1.  \"I mean, Sir, for complete recovery:\"

**Significance of the Master\'s illness**

MASTER: \"Oh, that! I am relieved. Can you explain one thing? How is it
that in spite of all these visions, all this ecstasy and samādhi, I am
so ill?\"

1.  \"Your suffering is no doubt great; but it has a deep meaning.\"
    MASTER: \"What is it?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"A change is coming over your mind. It is being directed toward the
    formless aspect of God. Even your \'ego of Knowledge is vanishing.\'
    \"

MASTER: \"That is true. My teaching of others is coming to an end. I
cannot give any more instruction. I see that everything is Rāma Himself.
And sometimes I say to myself, \'Whom shall I teach?\' You see, because
I am living in a rented house many kinds of devotees are coming here. I
hope I shall not have to put up a \'signboard\', like Shashadhar or
Krishnaprasanna Sen, announcing my lectures.\" (The Master and M.
laugh.)

1.  \"There is yet another purpose in this illness. It is the final
    sifting of disciples. The devotees have achieved in these few days
    what they could not have realized by five years\' *tapasya*. Their
    love and devotion are growing by leaps and bounds.\"

MASTER: \"That may be true; but Niranjan went back home. (To Niranjan)
Please tell me how you feel.\"

NIRANJAN: \"Formerly I loved you, no doubt, but now it is impossible for
me to live without you.\"

1.  \"One day I found out how great these young men were.\" MASTER:
    \"Where?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Sir, one day I stood in a corner of the house at Syampukur and
    watched the devotees. I clearly saw that every one of them had made
    his way here through almost insurmountable obstacles and given
    himself over to

your service.\"

As Sri Ramakrishna listened to these words he became abstracted. He was
silent a few moments. Presently he went into samādhi.

Regaining consciousness of the outer world, he said to M.: \"I saw
everything passing from form to formlessness. I want to tell you all the
things I saw, but I cannot. Well, this tendency of mine toward the
formless is only a sign of my nearing dissolution. Isn\'t that so?\"

M. (wonderingly): \"It may be.\"

MASTER: \"Even now I am seeing the Formless Indivisible
Satchidananda-just like that. . . But I have suppressed my feelings with
great difficulty.

\"What you said about the sifting of disciples was right: this illness
is showing who belong to the inner circle and who to the outer. Those
who are living here, renouncing the world, belong to the inner circle;
and those who pay occasional visits and ask, \'How are you, sir?\'
belong to the outer circle.

\"Didn\'t you notice Bhavanāth? The other day he came to Syampukur
dressed as a bridegroom and asked me, \'How are you?\' I haven\'t seen
him since. I show him love for Narendra\'s sake, but he is not in my
thought any more.

**Different classes of devotees**

(To M.) \"When God assumes a human body for the sake of His devotees,
many of His devotees accompany Him to this earth. Some of them belong to
the inner circle, some to the outer circle, and some become the
suppliers of His physical needs.

**The great visions**

\"I experienced one of my first ecstasies when I was ten or eleven years
old, as I was going through a meadow to the shrine of Viśālākśi. What a
vision! I became completely unconscious of the outer world.

\"I was twenty-two or twenty-three when the Divine Mother one day asked
me in the Kāli temple, \'Do you want to be Akshara?\' I didn\'t know
what the word meant. I asked Haladhāri about it. He said, \'Kshara means
jiva, living being; Akshara means Paramatman, the Supreme Soul.\'

\"At the hour of the evening worship in the Kāli temple I would climb to
the roof of the kuthi and cry out: \'O devotees, where are you all? Come
to me soon! I shall die of the company of worldly people!\' I told all
this to the \'Englishmen\'. They said it was all an illusion of my mind.
\'Perhaps it is\', I said to myself, and became calm. But now it is all
coming true; the devotees are coming.

**Five suppliers of the Master\'s needs**

\"The Divine Mother also showed me in a vision the five suppliers of my
needs; first, Mathur Babu, and second, Sambhu Mallick, whom I had not
then met. I had a vision of a fair-skinned man with a cap on his head.
Many days later, when I first met Sambhu, I recalled that vision; 1
realized that it was he whom I had seen in that ecstatic state. I
haven\'t yet found out the three other suppliers of my wants. But they
were all of a fair complexion. Surendra looks like one of them.

\"When I attained this\" state of God-Consciousness, a person exactly
resembling myself thoroughly shook my Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna nerves.
He licked with his tongue each of the lotuses of the six centres, and
those drooping lotuses at once turned their faces upward. And at last
the Sahasrara lotus became full-blown.

**Master\'s foreseeing of the coming of devotees**

\"The Divine Mother used to reveal to me the nature of the devotees
before their coming. I saw with these two eyes-not in a trance-the
kirtan party of Chaitanya going from the banyan-tree to the bakul-tree
in the Panchavati. I saw Balarām in the procession and also, I think,
yourself \[meaning M.\]. Chuni\'s spiritual

consciousness and yours, too, have been awakened by frequent visits to
me. In a vision I saw that Śaśi and Sarat had been among the followers
of Christ.

\"Under the banyan-tree in the Panchavati I had a vision of a child.
Hriday said to me, \'Then a son will soon be born to you.\' I said to
him:

\'But I regard all women as mother. How can I have a son?\' That child
is Rākhāl .

\"I said to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother, since You have placed me in
this condition, provide me with a rich man. That is why Mathur served me
for fourteen years. And in how many different ways! At my request he
arranged a special store-room for the sādhus. He provided me with
carriage and palanquin. And whatever I asked him to give to anyone, he
gave. The Brahmani identified him with Prataprudra.

\"Vijay had a vision of this form \[meaning himself\]. How do you
account for it? Vijay said to me, \'I touched it exactly as I am
touching you now.\'

\"Lātu counted thirty-one devotees in all. That\'s not many. But a few
more are becoming devotees through Vijay and Kedār.

\"It was revealed to me in a vision that during my last days I should
have to live on pudding. During my present illness my wife was one day
feeding me with pudding. I burst into tears and said, \'Is this my
living on pudding near the end, and so painfully?\' \"

**Monday, January 4 1886**

It was the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of the moon. At four
o\'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room. He
told M. that Ram Chatterji had come from the Kāli temple at Dakshineswar
to inquire about his health. He asked M. whether it was now very cold at
the temple garden.

**Master and Narendra**

Narendra arrived. Now and then the Master looked at him and smiled. It
appeared to M. that that day the Master\'s love for his beloved disciple
was boundless. He indicated to M. by a sign that Narendra had wept. Then
he remained quiet. Again he indicated that Narendra had cried all the
way from home.

No one spoke. Narendra broke the silence.

NARENDRA: \"I have been thinking of going there today.\"

MASTER: \"Where?\"

NARENDRA: \"To Dakshineswar. I intend to light a fire under the bel-tree
and meditate.\"

MASTER: \"No, the authorities of the powder-magazine will not allow it.
The Panchavati is a nice place. Many sādhus have practised japa and
meditation there. But it is very cold there. The place is dark, too.\"

Again for a few moments all sat in silence.

MASTER (to Narendra, smiling): \"Won\'t you continue your studies?\"

NARENDRA (looking at the Master and M.): \"I shall feel greatly relieved
if I find a medicine that will make me forget all I have studied.\"

The elder Gopal, who was also in the room, said, \"I shall accompany
Narendra.\"

Kalipada Ghosh had brought a box of grapes for Sri Ramakrishna; it lay
beside the Master. The Master gave Narendra a few and poured the rest on
the floor for the devotees to pick up.

**Narendra\'s yearning for God**

It was evening. Narendra was sitting in a room downstairs. He was
smoking and describing to M. the yearning of his soul. No one else was
with them.

NARENDRA: \"I was meditating here last Saturday when suddenly I felt a
peculiar sensation in my heart.\"

M: \"It was the awakening of the Kundalini.\"

NARENDRA: \"Probably it was. I clearly perceived the Ida and the Pingala
nerves. I asked Hazra to feel my chest. Yesterday I saw him \[meaning
the Master\] upstairs and told him about it. I said to him: \'All the
others have had their realization; please give me some. All have
succeeded; shall I alone remain unsatisfied?\' \"

M: \"What did he say to you?\"

NARENDRA: \"He said: \'Why don\'t you settle your family affairs first
and then come to me? You will get everything. What do you want?\' I
replied, \'It is my desire to remain absorbed in samādhi continually for
three or four days, only once in a while coming down to the sense plane
to eat a little food.\' Thereupon he said to me: \'You are a very
small-minded person. There is a state higher even than that. \"All that
exists art Thou\" -it is you who sing that song.\'\"

1.  \"Yes, he always says that after coming down from samādhi one sees
    that it is God Himself who has become the universe, the living
    beings, and all that exists. The Isvarakotis alone can attain that
    state. An ordinary man can at the most attain samādhi; but he cannot
    come down from that state.\"

NARENDRA: \"He \[the Master\] said: \'Settle your family affairs and
then come to me. You will attain a state

higher than samādhi.\' I went home this morning. My people scolded me,
saying: \'Why do you wander about like a vagabond? Your law examination
is near at hand and you are not paying any attention to your studies.
You wander about aimlessly.\'\"

M: \"Did your mother say anything?\"

NARENDRA: \"No. She was very eager to feed me. She gave me venison. I
ate a little, though I didn\'t feel like eating meat.\"

M: \"And then?\"

NARENDRA: \"I went to my study at my grandmother\'s. As I tried to read
I was seized with a great fear, as if studying were a terrible thing. My
heart struggled within me. I burst into tears: I never wept so bitterly
in my life. I left my books and ran away. I ran along the streets. My
shoes slipped from my feet-I didn\'t know where. I ran past a haystack
and got hay all over me. I kept on running along the road to
Cossipore.\"

Narendra remained silent a few minutes and then resumed.

NARENDRA: \"Since reading the Viveka Chudāmani I have felt very much
depressed. In it Sankaracharya says

that only through great *tapasya* and good fortune does one acquire
these three things: a human birth, the

desire for liberation, and refuge with a great soul. I said to myself:
\'I have surely gained all these three. As a result of great *tapasya* I
have been born a human being; through great *tapasya*, again, I have the
desire for liberation; and through great *tapasya* I have secured the
companionship of such a great soul.\' \"

M: \"Ah!\"

**His intense dispassion**

NARENDRA: \"I have no more taste for the world. I do not relish the
company of those who live in the world-of course, with the exception of
one or two devotees.\"

Narendra became silent again. A fire of intense renunciation was burning
within him. His soul was restless for the vision of God. He resumed the
conversation.

NARENDRA (to M.): \"You have found peace, but my soul is restless. You
are blessed indeed.\"

M. did not reply, but sat in silence. He said to himself, \"Sri
Ramakrishna said that one must pant and pine for God; only then may one
have the vision of Him.\"

Immediately after dusk M. went upstairs. He found Sri Ramakrishna
asleep.

It was about nine o\'clock in the evening. Niranjan and Śaśi were
sitting near the Master. He was awake. Every now and then he talked of
Narendra.

MASTER: \"How wonderful Narendra\'s state of mind is! You see, this very
Narendra did not believe in the forms of God. And now you see how his
soul is panting for God! You know that story of the man who asked his
guru how God could be realized. The guru said to him: \'Come with me. I
shall show you how one can realize God.\' Saying this, he took the
disciple to a lake and held his head under the water. After a short time
he released the disciple and asked him, \'How did you feel?\' \'I was
dying for a breath of air!\' said the disciple.

\"When the soul longs and yearns for God like that, then you will know
that you do not have long to wait for His vision. The rosy colour on the
eastern horizon shows that the sun will soon rise.\"

This day Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness was worse. In spite of much
suffering he said many things about Narendra-though mostly by means of
signs.

At night Narendra left for Dakshineswar. It was very dark, being the
night of the new moon. He was accompanied by one or two devotees. M.
spent the night at the Cossipore garden. He dreamt that he was seated in
an assembly of sannyāsis.

**Tuesday, January 5, 1886**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on his bed and talking to M. No one else was
in the room. It was about four o\'clock in the afternoon.

MASTER: \"If Kshirode makes a pilgrimage to Gangasagar, then please buy
a blanket for him.\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was silent a few minutes. Then he continued.

**Devotees\' detachment from the world**

MASTER: \"Well can you tell me what is happening to these youngsters?
Some are running off to Puri, and some to Gangasagar. All have renounced
their homes. Look at Narendra! When a man is seized with the spirit of
intense renunciation, he regards the world as a deep well and his
relatives as venomous cobras.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. Life in the world is full of suffering.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, it is the suffering of hell-and that from the very moment
of birth! Don\'t you see what a trouble one\'s wife and children are?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. You yourself said: \'These youngsters have no
    relationship whatsoever with the world. They owe nothing to the
    world, nor do they expect anything from it. It is the sense of
    obligation that entangles a man in the world.\' \"

MASTER: \"Don\'t you see how Niranjan is? His attitude toward the world
is this: \'Here, take what is Thine, and give me what is mine.\' That is
all. He has no further relationship with the world. There is nothing to
pull him

from behind.

\"\'Woman and gold\' alone is the world. Don\'t you see that if you have
money you want to lay it by?\"

M. burst out laughing. Sri Ramakrishna also laughed.

1.  \"One thinks a great deal before taking the money out. (Both laugh.)
    But once you said at Dakshineswar that it is quite different if one
    is able to live in the world free from the three *Gunās*.\"

MASTER: \"Yes-like a child!\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. But it is exceedingly difficult; it requires tremendous
    power.\" Sri Ramakrishna remained silent.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Yesterday they went to Dakshineswar to meditate. I had a dream.\"
    MASTER: \"What did you dream?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"I dreamt that Narendra and some others had become sannyāsis. They
    were sitting around a lighted fire, I too was there. They were
    smoking tobacco and blowing out puffs of smoke. I told them that I
    could smell hemp.\"

MASTER: \"Mental renunciation is the essential thing. That, too, makes
one a sannyāsi.\"

Sri Ramakrishna kept silent a few minutes and then went on.

MASTER: \"But one must set fire to one\'s desires. Then alone can one
succeed.\"

1.  \"You said to the pundit of the Mārwāris from Burrabazar that you
    had the desire for bhakti. Isn\'t the desire for bhakti to be
    counted as a desire?\".

MASTER: \"No, just as Hinche greens are not to be counted as greens.
Hinche restrains the secretion of bile.

\"Well, all my joy, all my ecstasy-where are they now?\"

1.  \"Perhaps you are now in the state of mind that the Gitā describes
    as beyond the three *Gunās*. Sattva, rajas, and tamas are performing
    their own functions, and you yourself are unattached-unattached even
    to sattva.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, the Divine Mother has put me into the state of a child.
Tell me, won\'t the body live through this illness?\"

The Master and M. became silent. Narendra entered the room. He was going
home to settle his family affairs.

Since his father\'s death Narendra had been in great distress about his
mother and brothers. Now and then they had been threatened with
starvation. Narendra was the family\'s only hope: they expected him to
earn money and feed them. But Narendra could not appear for his law
examination; he was passing through a state of intense renunciation. He
was going to Calcutta that day to make some provision for the family. A
friend had agreed to lend him one hundred rupees. That would take care
of the family for three months.

NARENDRA: \"I am going home. (To M.) I shall visit Mahimacharan on the
way. Will you come with me?\"

M. did not want to go. Looking at M., Sri Ramakrishna asked Narendra,
\"Why?\"

NARENDRA: \"I am going that way; so I shall stop at Mahima\'s place and
have a chat with him.\"

Sri Ramakrishna looked at Narendra intently.

NARENDRA: \"A friend who comes here said he would lend me a hundred
rupees. That will take care of the family for three months. I am going
home to make that arrangement.\"

Sri Ramakrishna remained silent and looked at M.

M. (to Narendra): \"No; you go ahead. I shall go later.\"

**Thursday, March 11, 1886**

It was eight o\'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna was in the big
hall on the second floor. Narendra, Śaśi, M., Sarat, and the elder Gopal
were in the room. Sri Ramakrishna was lying down. Sarat stood by his bed
and fanned him. The Master was speaking about his illness.

MASTER: \"If some of you go to Dakshineswar and see Bholanath, he will
give you a medicinal oil and also tell you how to apply it.\"

THE ELDER GOPAL: \"Then we shall go for the oil tomorrow morning.\"

M: \"If someone goes this evening he can bring the oil.\"

ŚAŚI: \"I can go.\"

MASTER (pointing to Sarat): \"He may go.\"

After a time Sarat set out for Dakshineswar to get the oil from
Bholanath. The devotees, sitting around Sri Ramakrishna\'s bed, were
silent. Suddenly the Master sat up. He spoke to Narendranath.

**Brahman is beyond the *Gunās***

MASTER: \"Brahman is without taint. The three *Gunās* are in Brahman,
but It is Itself untainted by them.

\"You may find both good and bad smells in the air; but the air itself
is unaffected.

\"Sankaracharya was going along a street in Benares. An outcaste
carrying a load of meat suddenly touched him. \'What!\' said Sankara.
\'You have touched me!\' \'Revered sir,\' said the outcaste, \'I have
not touched you nor have you touched me. The Ātman is above all
contamination, and you are that Pure Ātman.\'

**Brahman and māyā**

\"Of Brahman and māyā, the Jnāni rejects māyā.

\"Māyā is like a veil. You see, I hold this towel between you and the
lamp. You no longer see the light of the lamp.\"

Sri Ramakrishna put the towel between himself and the devotees.

MASTER: \"Now you cannot see my face any more. As Ramprasad said,
\'Raise the curtain, and behold!\'

\"The bhakta, however, does not ignore māyā. He worships Mahamaya.
Taking refuge in Her, he says: \'O Mother, please stand aside from my
path. Only if You step out of my way shall I have the Knowledge of
Brahman.\' The jnanis explain away all three states-waking, dream, and
deep sleep. But the bhaktas accept them all. As long as there is the
ego, everything else exists. So long as the \'I\' exists, the bhakta
sees that it is God who has become māyā, the universe, the living
beings, and the twenty-four cosmic principles.\"

Narendra and the other devotees sat silently listening.

MASTER: \"But the theory of māyā is dry. (To Narendra) Repeat what I
said.\"

NARENDRA: \"Māyā is dry.\"

Sri Ramakrishna affectionately stroked Narendra\'s face and hands and
said: \"Your face and hands show that you are a bhakta. But the Jnāni
has different features; they are dry.

**Wicked ego and spiritualised ego**

\"Even after attaining Jnāna, the Jnāni can live in the world, retaining
Vidyā-māyā, that is to say, bhakti, compassion, renunciation, and such
virtues. This serves him, two purposes: first, the teaching of men, and
second, the enjoyment of divine bliss. If a Jnāni remains silent, merged
in samādhi, then men\'s hearts will not be illumined. Therefore
Sankaracharya kept the \'ego of Knowledge\'. And further, a Jnāni lives
as a devotee, in the company of bhaktas, in order to enjoy and drink
deep of the Bliss of God.

\"The \'ego of Knowledge\' and the \'ego of Devotion\' can do no harm;
it is the \'wicked I\' that is harmful. After realizing God a man
becomes like a child. There is no harm in the \'ego of a child\'. It is
like the reflection of a face in a mirror: the reflection cannot call
names. Or it is like a burnt rope, which appears to be a rope but
disappears at the slightest puff. The ego that has been burnt in the
fire of Knowledge cannot injure anybody. It is an ego only in name.\"

\"Returning to the relative plane after reaching the Absolute is like
coming back to this shore of a river after going to the other side. Such
a return to the relative plane is for the teaching of men and for
enjoyment-participation in the divine sport in the world.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was talking in a very low voice. Addressing the
devotees, he said: \"The body is so ill, but the mind is free from
Avidyā-māyā. Let me tell you, there is no thought in my mind of Ramlal
or home or wife. But I have been worrying about Purna, that kayastha
boy. I am not in the least anxious about the others.

\"It is God alone who has kept this Vidyā-māyā in me, for the good of
men, for the welfare of the devotees.

**No liberation for Divine Incarnations**

\"But if one retains Vidyā-māyā one comes back to this world. The
Avatars keep this Vidyā-māyā. So long as a man has even the slightest
desire, he must be born again and again. When he gets rid of all
desires, then he is liberated. But the bhaktas do not seek liberation.

\"If a person dies in Benares he attains liberation; he is not born
again. Liberation is the goal of the jnanis.\"

NARENDRA: \"The other day we went to visit Mahimacharan.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Well?\"

NARENDRA: \"I have never before met such a dry Jnāni.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"What was the matter?\"

NARENDRA: \"He asked us to sing. Gangadhar sang:

> *Radha is restored to life by hearing her Krishna\'s name*
>
> *She looks about; in front of her she sees a tamala tree.*

\"On hearing this song, Mahimacharan said: \'Why such songs here? I
don\'t care for love and all that nonsense. Besides, I live here with my
wife and children. Why all these songs here?\' \"

MASTER (to M.): \"Do you see how afraid he is?\"

**Sunday, March 14, 1886**

Sri Ramakrishna sat facing the north in the large room upstairs. It was
evening. He was very ill. Narendra and Rākhāl were gently massaging his
feet. M, sat near by. The Master, by a sign, asked him, too, to stroke
his feet. M. obeyed.

The previous Sunday the devotees had observed Sri Ramakrishna\'s
birthday with worship and prayer. His birthday the year before had been
observed at Dakshineswar with great pomp; but this year, on account of
his illness, the devotees were very sad and there was no festivity at
all.

The Holy Mother busied herself day and night in the Master\'s service.
Among the young disciples, Narendra, Rākhāl , Niranjan, Sarat, Śaśi,
Baburam, Jogin, Lātu, and Kāli had been staying with him at the garden
house. The older devotees visited him daily, and some of them
occasionally spent the night there.

That day Sri Ramakrishna was feeling very ill. At midnight the moonlight
flooded the garden, but it could wake no response in the devotees\'
hearts. They were drowned in a sea of grief. They felt that they were
living in a beautiful city besieged by a hostile army. Perfect silence
reigned everywhere. Nature was still, except for the gentle rustling of
the leaves at the touch of the south wind. Sri Ramakrishna lay awake.
One or two devotees sat near him in silence. At times he seemed to doze.

**Master\'s great suffering**

M. was seated by his side. Sri Ramakrishna asked him by a sign to come
nearer. The sight of his suffering was unbearable. In a very soft voice
and with great difficulty he said to M:

\"I have gone on suffering so much for fear of making you all weep. But
if you all say: \'Oh, there is so much suffering! Let the body die\',
then I may give up the body.\"

These words pierced the devotees\' hearts. And he who was their father,
mother, and protector had uttered these words! What could they say? All
sat in silence. Some thought, \"Is this another crucifixion-the
sacrifice of the body for the sake of the devotees?\"

It was the dead of night. Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness was taking a turn
for the worse. The devotees wondered what was to be done. One of them
left for Calcutta. That very night Girish came to the garden house with
two physicians, Upendra and Navagopal.

The devotees sat near the Master. He felt a little better and said to
them: \"The illness is of the body. That is as it should be; I see that
the body is made of the five elements.\"

Turning to Girish, he said: \"I am seeing many forms of God. Among them
I find this one also \[meaning his own form\].\"

**Monday, March 15, 1886**

About seven o\'clock in the morning Sri Ramakrishna felt a little
better. He talked to the devotees, sometimes in a whisper, sometimes by
signs. Narendra, Rākhāl , Lātu, M., Gopal of Sinthi, and others were in
the room. They sat speechless and looked grave, thinking of the
Master\'s suffering of the previous night.

**His vision of unity**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Do you know what I see right now? I see that
it is God Himself who has become all this. It seems to me that men and
other living beings are made of leather, and that it is God Himself who,
dwelling inside these leather cases, moves the hands, the feet, the
heads. I had a similar vision once before, when I saw houses, gardens,
roads, men, cattle-all made of One Substance; it was as if they were all
made of wax.

\"I see that it is God Himself who has become the block, the
executioner, and the victim for the sacrifice.\"

As he describes this staggering experience, in which he realizes in full
the identity of all within the One Being, he is overwhelmed with emotion
and exclaims, \"Ah! What a vision!\"

Immediately Sri Ramakrishna goes into samādhi. He completely forgets his
body and the outer world. The devotees are bewildered. Not knowing what
to do, they sit still.

Presently the Master regains partial consciousness of the world and
says: \"Now I have no pain at all. I am my old self again.\"

The devotees are amazed to watch this state of the Master, beyond
pleasure and pain, weal and woe.

He casts his glance on Lātu and says: \"There is Loto. He bends his
head, resting it on the palm of his hand. I see that it is God Himself
who rests his head on His hand.\"

Sri Ramakrishna looks at the devotees and his love for them wells up in
a thousand streams. Like a mother showing her tenderness to her children
he touches the faces and chins of Rākhāl and Narendra.

**Master about himself**

A few minutes later he says to M., \"If the body were to be preserved a
few days more, many people would have their spirituality awakened.\"

He pauses a few minutes.

\"But this is not to be. This time the body will not be preserved.\"

The devotees eagerly await the Master\'s next words.

\"Such is not the will of God. This time the body will not be preserved,
lest, finding me guileless and foolish, people should take advantage of
me, and lest I, guileless and foolish as I am, should give away
everything to everybody. In this Kaliyuga, you see, people are averse to
meditation and japa.\"

RĀKHĀL (tenderly): \"Please speak to God that He may preserve your body
some time more.\"

MASTER: \"That depends on God\'s will.\"

NARENDRA: \"Your will and God\'s will have become one.\"

Sri Ramakrisna remains silent. He appears to be thinking about
something.

MASTER (to Narendra, Rākhāl , and the others): \"And nothing will happen
if I speak to God. Now I see that I and the Mother have become one. For
fear of her sister-in-law, Radha said to Krishna, \'Please dwell in my
heart.\' But when, later on, she became very eager for a vision of
Krishna-so eager that her heart pined and panted for her Beloved-He
would not come out.\"

RĀKHĀL (in a low voice, to the devotees): \"He is referring to God\'s
incarnation as Gaurānga.\"

The devotees sit silently in the room. Sri Ramakrishna looks at them
tenderly. Then he places his hand on his heart He is about to speak.

MASTER (to Narendra and the others): \"There are two persons in this.
One, the Divine Mother-\"

He pauses. The devotees eagerly look at him to hear what he will say
next.

MASTER: \"Yes, One is She. And the other is Her devotee. It is the
devotee who broke his arm, and it is the devotee who is now ill. Do you
understand?\"

*Gunās*-sattva, rajas, and tamas.\'

The devotees sit without uttering a word.

MASTER: \"Alas! To whom shall I say all this? Who will understand me?\"
Pausing a few moments, he says:

\"God becomes man, an Avatār, and comes to earth with His devotees. And
the devotee leave the world with Him.\"

RĀKHĀL : \"Therefore we pray that you may not go away and leave us
behind.\"

Sri Ramakrishna smiles and says:

\"A band of minstrels suddenly appears, dances, and sings, and it
departs in the same sudden manner. They come and they return, but none
recognizes them.\"

The Master and the devotees smile.

After a few minutes he says:

\"Suffering is inevitable when one assumes a human body.

\"Every now and then I say to myself, \'May I not have to come back to
earth again!\' But there is something else. After enjoying sumptuous
feasts outside, one does not relish cheap home cooking.

\"Besides, this assuming of a human body is for the sake of the
devotees.\"

Sri Ramakrishna looks at Narendra very tenderly.

**Master teaches Narendra Brahmajnana**

MASTER (to Narendra) : \"An outcaste was carrying a load of meat.
Sankaracharya, after bathing in the

Ganges, was passing by. Suddenly the outcaste touched him. Sankara said
sharply: \'What! You touched me!\' \'Revered sir,\' he replied, \'I have
not touched you nor have you touched me. Reason with me: Are you the
body, the mind, or the buddhi? Analyse what you are. You are the Pure
Ātman, unattached and free,

unaffected by the three

\"Do you know what Brahman is like? It is like air. Good and bad smells
are carried by the air, but the air itself is unaffected.\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"He is beyond the *Gunās* and māyā-beyond both the \'māyā of
knowledge\' and the \'māyā of ignorance\'. \'Woman and gold\' is the
\'māyā of ignorance\'. Knowledge, renunciation, devotion, and other
spiritual qualities are the splendours of the \'māyā of knowledge\'.

**\"Ego of Knowledge\"**

Sankaracharya kept this \'māyā of knowledge\'; and that you and these
others feel concerned about me is also due to this \'māyā of
knowledge\'.

\"Following the \'māyā of knowledge\' step by step, one attains the
Knowledge of Brahman. This \'māyā of knowledge\' may be likened to the
last few steps of the stairs. Next is the roof. Some, even after
reaching the roof, go up and down the stairs; that is to say, some even
after realizing God, retain the \'ego of Knowledge\'. They retain this
in order to teach others, taste divine bliss, and sport with the
devotees of God.\"

NARENDRA: \"Some people get angry with me when I speak of
renunciation.\"

MASTER (in a whisper): \"Renunciation is necessary.

(Pointing to his different limbs) \"If one thing is placed upon another,
you must remove the one to get the other. Can you get the second thing
without removing the first?\"

NARENDRA: \"True, sir.\"

MASTER (in a whisper, to Narendra): \"When one sees everything filled
with God alone, does one see anything else?\"

NARENDRA: \"Must one renounce the world?\"

MASTER: \"Didn\'t I say just now: \'When one sees everything filled with
God alone, does one see anything else?\' Does one then see any such
thing as the world?

\"I mean mental renunciation. Not one of those who have come here is a
worldly person. Some of them had a slight desire-for instance, a fancy
for woman. (Rākhāl and M. smile.) And that desire has been fulfilled.\"

The Master looks at Narendra tenderly and becomes filled with love.
Looking at the devotees, he says, \"Grand!\"

With a smile Narendra asks the Master, \"What is grand?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"I see that preparations are going on for a grand
renunciation.\"

Narendra and the devotees look silently at the Master. Rākhāl resumes
the conversation.

RĀKHĀL (smiling, to the Master): \"Narendra is now beginning to
understand you rather well.\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughs and says: \"Yes, that is so. I see that many
others, too, are beginning to understand. (To M.) Isn\'t that so?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir.\" Narendra and M

Sri Ramakrishna turns his eyes to Narendra and M. and by a sign of his
finger draws the attention of the devotees to them. He first points out
Narendra and then M. Rākhāl understands the Master\'s hint and says to
him with a smile, \"Don\'t you mean that Narendra has the attitude of a
hero, and he \[meaning M.\] that of a handmaid of God?\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughs.

NARENDRA (smiling, to Rākhāl ): \"He \[meaning M.\] doesn\'t talk much
and is bashful. Is that why you say he is a handmaid of God?\"

MASTER (smiling, to Narendra): \"Well, what do you think of me?\"

NARENDRA: \"You are a hero, a handmaid of God, and everything else.\"

These words fill Sri Ramakrishna with divine emotion. He places his hand
on his heart and is about to say something.

He says to Narendra and the other devotees:

\"I see that all things-everything that exist-have come from this.\"

He asks Narendra by a sign, \"What did you understand?\"

NARENDRA: \"All created objects have come from you.\"

The Master\'s face beams with joy. He says to Rākhāl , \"Did you hear
what he said?\"

Sri Ramakrishna asks Narendra to sing. Narendra intones a hymn. His mind
is full of renunciation. He sings:

> *Unsteady is water on the lotus petal;*
>
> *Just as unsteady is the life of man.*
>
> *One moment with a sādhu is the boat*
>
> *That takes one across the ocean of this world. . . .*

Narendra has hardly finished one or two lines, when Sri Ramakrishna says
to him by a sign: \"What are you singing? That is a very insignificant
attitude, a very commonplace thing.\"

Now Narendra sings about the love of Krishna, impersonating one of His
handmaids:

> *How strange, O friend, are the rules of life and death!*
>
> *The Youth of Braja has Red away,*
>
> *And this poor maid of Braja soon will die.*
>
> *Madhava is in love with other maids*
>
> *More beautiful than I.*
>
> *Alas! He has forgotten the milkman\'s artless daughter.*
>
> *Who would ever have guessed, dear friend, that He,*
>
> *A Lover so tender, so divine,*
>
> *Could be a beggar simply for outward charm?*
>
> *I was a fool not to have seen it before;*
>
> *But carried away by His beauty,*
>
> *I yearned alone to hold His two feet to my breast.*
>
> *Now I shall drown myself in the Jamuna\'s stream,*
>
> *Or take a draught of poison, friend!*
>
> *Or I shall bind a creeper round my neck,*
>
> *Or hang myself from a young tamala tree;*
>
> *Or, failing all of these,*
>
> *Destroy my wretched self by chanting Krishna\'s name.*

Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees are greatly moved by the song. The
Master and Rākhāl shed tears of love.

Narendra is intoxicated with the love of the gopis of Braja for their
Sweetheart, Sri Krishna, and sings:

> *O Krishna! Beloved! You are mine.*
>
> *What shall I say to You, O Lord?*
>
> *What shall I ever say to You?*
>
> *Only a woman am I,*
>
> *And never fortune\'s favourite;*
>
> *I do not know what to say.*
>
> *You are the mirror for the hand,*
>
> *And You are the flower for the hair.*
>
> *O Friend, I shall make a flower of You*
>
> *And wear You in my hair;*
>
> *Under my braids I shall hide You, Friend!*
>
> *No one will see You there.*
>
> *You are the betel-leaf for the lips,*
>
> *The sweet collyrium for the eyes;*
>
> *O Friend, with You I shall stain my lips,*
>
> *With You I shall paint my eyes.*
>
> *You are the sandal-paste for the body;*
>
> *You are the necklace for the neck.*
>
> *I shall anoint myself with You,*
>
> *My fragrant Sandal-paste,*
>
> *And soothe my body and my soul.*
>
> *I shall wear You, my lovely Necklace,*
>
> *Here about my neck,*
>
> *And You will lie upon my bosom,*
>
> *Close to my throbbing heart.*
>
> *You are the Treasure in my body;*
>
> *You are the Dweller in my house.*
>
> *You are to me, O Lord,*
>
> *What wings are to the flying bird,*
>
> *What water is to the fish.*
>
> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 50**