
MASTER AND DISCIPLE

> February 1882

**M.\'s first visit to the Master**

IT WAS ON A SUNDAY in spring, a few days after Sri Ramakrishna\'s
birthday, that M. met him the first time. Sri Ramakrishna lived at the
Kailibari, the temple garden of Mother Kali, on the bank of the Ganges
at Dakshineswar.

M., being at leisure on Sundays, had gone with his friend Sidhu to visit
several gardens at Baranagore. As they were walking in Prasanna
Bannerji\'s garden, Sidhu said: \"There is a charming place on the bank
of the Ganges where a paramahamsa lives. Should you like to go there?\"
M. assented and they started immediately for the Dakshineswar temple
garden. They arrived at the main gate at dusk and went straight to Sri
Ramakrishna\'s room. And there they found him seated on a wooden couch,
facing the east. With a smile on his face he was talking of God. The
room was full of people, all seated on the floor, drinking in his words
in deep silence.

M. stood there speechless and looked on. It was as if he were standing
where all the holy places met and as if Sukadeva himself were speaking
the word of God, or as if Sri Chaitanya were singing the name and
glories of the Lord in Puri with Ramananda, Swarup, and the other
devotees.

**Formalities and essentials of religion**

Sri Ramakrishna said: \"When, hearing the name of Hari or Rāma once, you
shed tears and your hair stands on end, then you may know for certain
that you do not have to perform such devotions as the sandhya any more.
Then only will you have a right to renounce rituals; or rather, rituals
will drop away of themselves. Then it will be enough if you repeat only
the name of Rāma or Hari, or even simply Om.\" Continuing, he said,
\"The sandhya merges in the Gayatri, and the Gayatri merges in Om.\"

M. looked around him with wonder and said to himself: \"What a beautiful
place! What a charming man! How beautiful his words are! I have no wish
to move from this spot.\" After a few minutes he thought, \"Let me see
the place first; then I\'ll come back here and sit down.\"

As he left the room with Sidhu, he heard the sweet music of the evening
service arising in the temple from gong, bell, drum, and cymbal. He
could hear music from the nahabat, too, at the south end of the garden.
The sounds travelled over the Ganges, floating away and losing
themselves in the distance. A soft spring wind was blowing, laden with
the fragrance of flowers; the moon had just appeared. It was as if
nature and man together were preparing for the evening worship. M. and
Sidhu visited the twelve Siva temples, the Radhakanta temple, and the
temple of Bhavatarini. And as M. watched the services before the images
his heart was filled with joy.

On the way back to Sri Ramakrishna\'s room the two friends talked. Sidhu
told M. that the temple garden had been founded by Rani Rasmani. He said
that God was worshipped there daily as Kali, Krishna, and Siva, and that
within the gates sadhus and beggars were fed. When they reached Sri
Ramakrishna\'s door again, they found it shut, and Brinde, the Maid,
standing outside. M., who had been trained in English manners and would
not enter a room without permission, asked her, \"Is the holy man in?\"
Brinde replied, \"Yes he\'s in the room.\"

M: \"How long has he lived here?\"

BRINDE: \"Oh, he has been here a long time.\"

M: \"Does he read many books?\"

BRINDE: \"Books? Oh, dear no! They\'re all on his tongue.\"

M. had just finished his studies in college. It amazed him to hear that
Sri Ramakrishna read no books.

23. \"Perhaps it is time for his evening worship. May we go into the
    room? Will you tell him we are anxious to see him?\"

BRINDE: \"Go right in, children. Go in and sit down.\"

Entering the room, they found Sri Ramakrishna alone, seated on the
wooden couch. Incense had just been burnt and all the doors were shut.
As he entered, M. with folded hands saluted the Master. Then, at the
Master\'s bidding, he and Sidhu sat on the floor. Sri Ramakrishna asked
them: \"Where do you live? What is your occupation? Why have you come to
Baranagore?\" M. answered the questions, but he noticed that now and
then the Master seemed to become absent-minded. Later he learnt that
this mood is called bhava, ecstasy. It is like the state of the angler
who has been sitting with his rod: the fish comes and swallows the bait,
and the float begins to tremble; the angler is on the alert; he grips
the rod and watches the float steadily and eagerly; he will not speak to
anyone. Such was the state of Sri Ramakrishna\'s mind. Later M. heard,
and himself noticed, that Sri Ramakrishna would often go into this mood
after dusk, sometimes becoming totally unconscious of the outer world.

23. \"Perhaps you want to perform your evening worship. In that case may
    we take our leave?\" SRI RAMAKRISHNA (still in ecstasy):
    \"No-evening worship? No, it is not exactly that.\"

After a little conversation M. saluted the Master and took his leave.
\"Come again\", Sri Ramakrishna said.

On his way home M. began to wonder: \"Who is this serene-looking man who
is drawing me back to him? Is it possible for a man to be great without
being a scholar? How wonderful it is! I should like to see him again. He
himself said, \'Come again.\' I shall go tomorrow or the day after.\"

**Second visit**

M.\'s second visit to Sri Ramakrishna took place on the southeast
verandah at eight o\'clock in the morning. The Master was about to be
shaved, the barber having just arrived. As the cold season still
lingered he had put on a moleskin shawl bordered with red. Seeing M.,
the Master said: \"So you have come. That\'s good. Sit down here.\" He
was smiling. He stammered a little when he spoke.

SRI RAMAKRISHNA (to M.): \"Where do you live?\"

M: \"In Calcutta, sir.\"

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: \"Where are you staying here?\"

M: \"I am at Baranagore at my older sister\'s-Ishan Kaviraj\'s house.\"

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: \"Oh, at Ishan\'s? Well, how is Keshab now? He was very
ill.\"

M: \"Indeed, I have heard so too, but I believe he is well now.\"

**Master\'s love for Keshab**

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: \"I made a vow to worship the Mother with green coconut
and sugar on Keshab\'s recovery. Sometimes, in the early hours of the
morning, I would wake up and cry before Her: \'Mother, please make
Keshab well again. If Keshab doesn\'t live, whom shall I talk with when
I go to Calcutta?\' And so it was

that I resolved to offer Her the green coconut and sugar.

\"Tell me, do you know of a certain Mr. Cook who has come to Calcutta?
Is it true that he is giving lectures? Once Keshab took me on a steamer,
and this Mr. Cook, too was in the party.\"

23. \"Yes, sir, I have heard something like that; but I have never been
    to his lectures. I don\'t know much about him.\"

**Sri Ramakrishna on M.\'s marriage**

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: \"Pratap\'s brother came here. He stayed a few days. He
had nothing to do and said he wanted to live here. I came to know that
he had left his wife and children with his father-in-law. He has a whole
brood of them! So I took him to task. Just fancy! He is the father of so
many children! Will people from the neighbourhood feed them and bring
them up? He isn\'t even ashamed that someone else is feeding his wife
and children, and that they have been left at his father-in-law\'s
house. I scolded him very hard and asked him to look for a job. Then he
was willing to leave here.

\"Are you married?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

SRI RAMAKRISHNA (with a shudder): \"Oh, Ramlal! Alas, he is married!\"

Like one guilty of a terrible offence, M. sat motionless, his eyes fixed
on the ground. He thought, \"Is it such a wicked thing to get married?\"

The Master continued, \"Have you any children?\"

M. this time could hear the beating of his own heart. He whispered in a
trembling voice, \"Yes, sir, I have children.\"

Very sadly Sri Ramakrishna said, \"Ah me! He even has children!\"

Thus rebuked M. sat speechless. His pride had received a blow. After a
few minutes Sri Ramakrishna looked at him kindly and said
affectionately: \"You see, you have certain good signs. I know them by
looking at a person\'s forehead, his eyes, and so on. Tell me, now, what
kind of person is your wife? Has she spiritual attributes, or is she
under the power of avidya?\"

M: \"She is all right. But I am afraid she is ignorant.\"

MASTER (with evident displeasure): \"And you are a man of knowledge!\"

M. had yet to learn the distinction between knowledge and ignorance. Up
to this time his conception had been that one got knowledge from books
and schools. Later on he gave up this false conception. He was taught
that to know God is knowledge, and not to know Him, ignorance. When Sri
Ramakrishna exclaimed, \"And you are a man of knowledge!\", M.\'s ego
was again badly shocked.

**God with and without form**

MASTER: \"Well, do you believe in God with form or without form?\"

M., rather surprised, said to himself: \"How can one believe in God
without form when one believes in God with form? And if one believes in
God without form, how can one believe that God has a form? Can these two
contradictory ideas be true at the same time? Can a white liquid like
milk be black?\"

M: \"Sir, I like to think of God as formless.\"

MASTER: \"Very good. It is enough to have faith in either aspect. You
believe in God without form; that is quite all right. But never for a
moment think that this alone is true and all else false. Remember that
God with form is just as true as God without form. But hold fast to your
own conviction.\"

The assertion that both are equally true amazed M.; he had never learnt
this from his books. Thus his ego received a third blow; but since it
was not yet completely crushed, he came forward to argue with the Master
a little more.

**God and the clay image**

5888. \"Sir, suppose one believes in God with form. Certainly He is not
      the clay image!\" MASTER (interrupting): \"But why clay? It is an
      image of Spirit.\"

M. could not quite understand the significance of this \"image of
Spirit\". \"But, sir,\" he said to the Master, \"one should explain to
those who worship the clay image that it is not God, and that, while
worshipping it, they should have God in view and not the clay image. One
should not worship clay.\"

**God the only real teacher**

MASTER (sharply): \"That\'s the one hobby of you Calcutta people -
giving lectures and bringing others to the light! Nobody ever stops to
consider how to get the light himself. Who are you to teach others?

\"He who is the Lord of the Universe will teach everyone. He alone
teaches us, who has created this universe; who has made the sun and
moon, men and beasts, and all other beings; who has provided means for
their sustenance; who has given children parents and endowed them with
love to bring them up. The Lord has done so many things - will He not
show people the way to worship Him? If they need teaching, then He will
be the Teacher. He is our Inner Guide.

\"Suppose there is an error in worshipping the clay image; doesn\'t God
know that through it He alone is being invoked? He will he pleased with
that very worship. Why should you get a headache over it? You had better
try for knowledge and devotion yourself.\"

This time M. felt that his ego was completely crushed. He now said to
himself: \"Yes, he has spoken the truth. What need is there for me to
teach others? Have I known God? Do I really love Him? \'I haven\'t room
enough for myself in my bed, and I am inviting my friend to share it
with me!\' I know nothing about God, yet I am trying to teach others.
What a shame! How foolish I am! This is not mathematics or history or
literature, that one can teach it to others. No, this is the deep
mystery of God. What he says appeals to me.\"

This was M.\'s first argument with the Master, and happily his last.

MASTER: \"You were talking of worshipping the clay image. Even if the
image is made of clay, there is need for that sort of worship. God
Himself has provided different forms of worship. He who is the Lord of
the Universe has arranged all these forms to suit different men in
different stages of knowledge.

\"The mother cooks different dishes to suit the stomachs of her
different children. Suppose she has five children. If there is a fish to
cook, she prepares various dishes from it - pilau, pickled fish, fried
fish, and so on - to suit their different tastes and powers of
digestion.

\"Do you understand me?\"

Need of holy company & Meditation in solitude

M. (humbly): \"Yes, sir. How, sir, may we fix our minds on God?\"

MASTER: \"Repeat God\'s name and sing His glories, and keep holy
company; and now and then visit God\'s devotees and holy men. The mind
cannot dwell on God if it is immersed day and night in worldliness, in
worldly duties and responsibilities; it is most necessary to go into
solitude now and then and think of God. To fix the mind on God is very
difficult, in the beginning, unless one practises meditation in
solitude. When a tree is young it should be fenced all around; otherwise
it may be destroyed by cattle.

\"To meditate, you should withdraw within yourself or retire to a
secluded corner or to the forest. And you should always discriminate
between the Real and the unreal. God alone is real, the Eternal
Substance; all else is unreal, that is, impermanent. By discriminating
thus, one should shake off impermanent objects from the mind.\"

**God and worldly duties**

M. (humbly):\"How ought we to live in the world?\"

MASTER: \"Do all your duties, but keep your mind on God. Live with all -
with wife and children, father and mother - and serve them. Treat them
as if they were very dear to you, but know in your heart of hearts that
they do not belong to you.

\"A maidservant in the house of a rich man performs all the household
duties, but her thoughts are fixed on her own home in her native
village. She brings up her Master\'s children as if they were her own.
She even speaks of them as \'my Rāma\' or \'my Hari\'. But in her own
mind she knows very well that they do not belong to her at all.

\"The tortoise moves about in the water. But can you guess where her
thoughts are? There on the bank, where her eggs are lying. Do all your
duties in the world, but keep your mind on God.

\"If you enter the world without first cultivating love for God, you
will be entangled more and more. You will be overwhelmed with its
danger, its grief, its sorrows. And the more you think of worldly
things, the more you will be attached to them.

\"First rub your hands with oil and then break open the jack-fruit;
otherwise they will be smeared with its sticky milk. First secure the
oil of divine love, and then set your hands to the duties of the world.

\"But one must go into solitude to attain this divine love. To get
butter from milk you must let it set into curd in a secluded spot; if it
is too much disturbed, milk won\'t turn into curd. Next, you must put
aside all other duties, sit in a quiet spot, and churn the curd. Only
then do you get butter.

\"Further, by meditating on God in solitude the mind acquires knowledge,
dispassion, and devotion. But the very same mind goes downward if it
dwells in the world. In the world there is only one thought: \'woman and
gold\'.2

\"The world is water and the mind milk. If you pour milk into water they
become one; you cannot find the pure milk any more. But turn the milk
into curd and churn it into butter. Then, when that butter is placed in
water, it will float. So, practise spiritual discipline in solitude and
obtain the butter of knowledge and love. Even if you keep that butter in
the water of the world the two will not mix. The butter will float.

**Practice of discrimination**

\"Together with this, you must practise discrimination. \'Woman and
gold\' is impermanent. God is the only

Eternal Substance. What does a man get with money? Food, clothes, and a
dwelling-place - nothing more. You cannot realize God with its help.
Therefore money can never be the goal of life. That is the process of
discrimination. Do you understand?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. I recently read a Sanskrit play called Prabodha
Chandrodaya. It deals with discrimination.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, discrimination about objects. Consider - what is there in
money or in a beautiful body? Discriminate and you will find that even
the body of a beautiful woman consists of bones, flesh, fat, and other
disagreeable things. Why should a man give up God and direct his
attention to such things? Why should a man forget God for their sake?\"

**How to see God**

M: \"Is it possible to see God?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, certainly. Living in solitude now and then, repeating
God\'s name and singing His glories, and discriminating between the Real
and the unreal - these are the means to employ to see Him.\"

**Longing and yearning**

M: \"Under what conditions does one see God?\"

MASTER: \"Cry to the Lord with an intensely yearning heart and you will
certainly see Him. People shed a whole jug of tears for wife and
children. They swim in tears for money. But who weeps for God? Cry to
Him with a real cry.\"

The Master sang:

> *Cry to your Mother Syama , with a real cry, O mind!*
>
> *And how can She hold Herself from you?*
>
> *How can Syama stay away?*
>
> *How can your Mother Kali hold Herself away?*
>
> *O mind, if you are in earnest, bring Her an offering*
>
> *Of bel-leaves and hibiscus flowers;*
>
> *Lay at Her feet your offering*
>
> *And with it mingle the fragrant sandal-paste of Love.*

Continuing, he said: \"Longing is like the rosy dawn. After the dawn out
comes the sun. Longing is followed by the vision of God.

\"God reveals Himself to a devotee who feels drawn to Him by the
combined force of these three attractions: the attraction of worldly
possessions for the worldly man, the child\'s attraction for its mother,
and the husband\'s attraction for the chaste wife. If one feels drawn to
Him by the combined force of these three attractions, then through it
one can attain Him.

\"The point is, to love God even as the mother loves her child, the
chaste wife her husband, and the worldly man his wealth. Add together
these three forces of love, these three powers of attraction, and give
it all to God. Then you will certainly see Him.

\"It is necessary to pray to Him with a longing heart. The kitten knows
only how to call its mother, crying, \'Mew, mew!\' It remains satisfied
wherever its mother puts it. And the mother cat puts the kitten
sometimes in the kitchen, sometimes on the floor, and sometimes on the
bed. When it suffers it cries only, \'Mew, mew!\'

That\'s all it knows. But as soon as the mother hears this cry, wherever
she may be; she comes to the kitten.\"

**Third visit**

It was Sunday afternoon when M. came on his third visit to the Master.
He had been profoundly impressed by his first two visits to this
wonderful man. He had been thinking of the Master constantly, and of the
utterly simple way he explained the deep truths of the spiritual life.
Never before had he met such a man.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch. The room was filled with
devotees,3 who had taken advantage of the holiday to come to see the
Master. M. had not yet become acquainted with any of them; so he took
his seat in a corner. The Master smiled as he talked with the devotees.

**Narendra**

He addressed his words particularly to a young man of nineteen, named
Narendranath, who was a college student and frequented the Sadharan
Brahmo Samaj. His eyes were bright, his words were full of spirit, and
he had the look of a lover of God.

**How the spiritually minded should look upon the worldly**

M. guessed that the conversation was about worldly men, who look down on
those who aspire to spiritual things. The Master was talking about the
great number of such people in the world, and about how to deal with
them.

MASTER (to Narendra): \"How do you feel about it? Worldly people say all
kinds of things about the spiritually minded. But look here! When an
elephant moves along the street, any number of curs and other small
animals may bark and cry after it; but the elephant doesn\'t even look
back at them. If people speak ill of you, what will you think of them?\"

NARENDRA: \"I shall think that dogs are barking at me.\"

**God in every being**

MASTER (Smiling): \"Oh, no! You mustn\'t go that far, my child!
(Laughter). God dwells in all beings. But you may be intimate only with
good people; you must keep away from the evil-minded. God is even in the
tiger; but you cannot embrace the tiger on that account. (Laughter). You
may say, \'Why run away from a tiger, which is also a manifestation of
God?\' The answer to that is: \'Those who tell you to run away are also
manifestations of God - and why shouldn\'t you listen to them?\'

**Parable of the \"elephant God\"**

\"Let me tell you a story. In a forest there lived a holy man who had
many disciples. One day he taught them to see God in all beings and,
knowing this, to bow low before them all. A disciple went to the forest
to gather wood for the sacrificial fire. Suddenly he heard an outcry:
\'Get out of the way! A mad elephant is coming!\' All but the disciple
of the holy man took to their heels. He reasoned that the elephant was
also God in another form. Then why should he run away from it? He stood
still, bowed before the animal, and began to sing its praises. The mahut
of the elephant was shouting: \'Run away! Run away!\' But the disciple
didn\'t move. The animal seized him with its trunk, cast him to one
side, and went on its way. Hurt and bruised, the disciple lay
unconscious on the ground. Hearing what had happened, his teacher and
his brother disciples came to him and carried him to the hermitage. With
the help of some medicine he soon regained consciousness. Someone asked
him, \'You knew the elephant was coming - why didn\'t you leave the
place?\' \'But\', he said, \'our teacher

has told us that God Himself has taken all these forms, of animals as
well as men. Therefore, thinking it was only the elephant God that was
coming, I didn\'t run away.\' At this the teacher said: \'Yes, my child,
it is true that the elephant God was coming; but the mahut God forbade
you to stay there. Since all are manifestations of God, why didn\'t you
trust the mahut\'s words? You should have heeded the words of the mahut
God.\' (Laughter)

\"It is said in the scriptures that water is a form of God. But some
water is fit to be used for worship, some water for washing the face,
and some only for washing plates or dirty linen. This last sort cannot
be used for drinking or for a holy purpose. In like manner, God
undoubtedly dwells in the hearts of all - holy and unholy, righteous and
unrighteous; but a man should not have dealings with the unholy, the
wicked, the impure. He must not be intimate with them. With some of them
he may exchange words, but with others he shouldn\'t go even that far.
He should keep aloof from such people.\"

**How to deal with the wicked**

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, if a wicked man is about to do harm, or actually does
so, should we keep quiet then?\"

MASTER: \"A man living in society should make a show of tamas to protect
himself from evil-minded people.

But he should not harm anybody in anticipation of harm likely to be done
him.

**Parable of the snake**

\"Listen to a story. Some cowherd boys used to tend their cows in a
meadow where a terrible poisonous snake lived. Everyone was on the alert
for fear of it. One day a brahmachari was going along the meadow. The
boys ran to him and said: \'Revered sir, please don\'t go that way. A
venomous snake lives over there.\' \'What of it, my good children?\'
said the brahmachari. \'I am not afraid of the snake. I know some
mantras.\' So saying, he continued on his way along the meadow. But the
cowherd boys, being afraid, did not accompany him. In the mean time the
snake moved swiftly toward him with upraised hood. As soon as it came
near, he recited a mantra, and the snake lay at his feet like an
earthworm. The brahmachari said: \'Look here. Why do you go about doing
harm? Come, I will give you a holy word. By repeating it you will learn
to love God. Ultimately you will realize Him and so get rid of your
violent nature.\' Saying this, he taught the snake a holy word and
initiated him into spiritual life. The snake bowed before the teacher
and said, \'Revered sir, how shall I practise spiritual discipline?\'
\'Repeat that sacred word\', said the teacher, \'and do no harm to
anybody\'. As he was about to depart, the brahmachari said, \'I shall
see you again.\'

\"Some days passed and the cowherd boys noticed that the snake would not
bite. They threw stones at it. Still it showed no anger; it behaved as
if it were an earthworm. One day one of the boys came close to it,
caught it by the tail, and, whirling it round and round, dashed it again
and again on the ground and threw it away. The snake vomited blood and
became unconscious. It was stunned. It could not move. So, thinking it
dead, the boys went their way.

\"Late at night the snake regained consciousness. Slowly and with great
difficulty it dragged itself into its hole; its bones were broken and it
could scarcely move. Many days passed. The snake became a mere skeleton
covered with a skin. Now and then, at night, it would come out in search
of food. For fear of the boys it would not leave its hole during the
day-time. Since receiving the sacred word from the teacher, it had given
up doing harm to others. It maintained its life on dirt, leaves, or the
fruit that dropped from the trees.

\"About a year later the brahmachari came that way again and asked after
the snake. The cowherd boys told him that it was dead. But he couldn\'t
believe them. He knew that the snake would not die before attaining the
fruit of the holy word with which it had been initiated. He found his
way to the place and, searching here and there, called it by the name he
had given it. Hearing the teacher\'s voice, it came out of its hole and
bowed before him with great reverence. \'How are you?\' asked the
brahmachari. \'I am well, sir\', replied the

snake. \'But\', the teacher asked, \'why are you so thin?\' The snake
replied: \'Revered sir, you ordered me not to harm any body. So I have
been living only on leaves and fruit. Perhaps that has made me
thinner.\'

\"The snake had developed the quality of sattva; it could not be angry
with anyone. It had totally forgotten that the cowherd boys had almost
killed it.

\"The brahmachari said: \'It can\'t be mere want of food that has
reduced you to this state. There must be some other reason. Think a
little.\' Then the snake remembered that the boys had dashed it against
the ground. It said: \'Yes, revered sir, now I remember. The boys one
day dashed me violently against the ground. They are ignorant, after
all. They didn\'t realize what a great change had come over my mind. How
could they know I wouldn\'t bite or harm anyone?\' The brahmachari
exclaimed: \'What a shame! You are such a fool! You don\'t know how to
protect yourself. I asked you not to bite, but I didn\'t forbid you to
hiss. Why didn\'t you scare them by hissing?\'

\"So you must hiss at wicked people. You must frighten them lest they
should do you harm. But never inject your venom into them. One must not
injure others.

\"In this creation of God there is a variety of things: men, animals,
trees, plants. Among the animals some are good, some bad. There are
ferocious animals like the tiger. Some trees bear fruit sweet as nectar,
and others bear fruit that is poisonous. Likewise, among human beings,
there are the good and the wicked, the holy and the unholy. There are
some who are devoted to God, and others who are attached to the world.

**Four classes of men**

\"Men may be divided into four classes: those bound by the fetters of
the world, the seekers after liberation, the liberated, and the
ever-free.

\"Among the ever-free we may count sages like Narada. They live in the
world for the good of others, to teach men spiritual truth.

\"Those in bondage are sunk in worldliness and forgetful of God. Not
even by mistake do they think of God.

\"The seekers after liberation want to free themselves from attachment
to the world. Some of them succeed and others do not.

\"The liberated souls, such as the sadhus and mahatmas, are not
entangled in the world, in \'woman and gold\'.

Their minds are free from worldliness. Besides, they always meditate on
the Lotus Feet of God.

\"Suppose a net has been cast into a lake to catch fish. Some fish are
so clever that they are never caught in the net. They are like the
ever-free. But most of the fish are entangled in the net. Some of them
try to free themselves from it, and they are like those who seek
liberation. But not all the fish that struggle succeed. A very few do
jump out of the net, making a big splash in the water. Then the
fishermen shout, \'Look! There goes a big one!\' But most of the fish
caught in the net cannot escape, nor do they make any effort to get out.
On the contrary, they burrow into the mud with the net in their mouths
and lie there quietly, thinking, \'We need not fear any more; we are
quite safe here.\' But the poor things do not know that the fishermen
will drag them out with the net. These are like the men bound to the
world.

\"The bound souls are tied to the world by the fetters of \'woman and
gold\'. They are bound hand and foot. Thinking that \'woman and gold\'
will make them happy and give them security, they do not realize that it
will lead them to annihilation. When a man thus bound to the world is
about to die, his wife asks, \'You are about to go; but what have you
done for me?\' Again, such is his attachment to the things of the world
that, when he sees the lamp burning brightly, he says: \'Dim the light.
Too much oil is being used.\' And he is on his death-bed!

\"The bound souls never think of God. If they get any leisure they
indulge in idle gossip and foolish talk, or they engage in fruitless
work. If you ask one of them the reason, he answers, \'Oh, I cannot keep
still; so I am making a hedge.\' When time hangs heavy on their hands
they perhaps start playing cards.\"

There was deep silence in the room.

**Redeeming power of faith**

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, is there no help, then, for such a worldly person?\"

MASTER: \"Certainly there is. From time to time he should live in the
company of holy men, and from time to time go into solitude to meditate
on God. Furthermore, he should practise discrimination and pray to God,
\'Give me faith and devotion.\' Once a person has faith he has achieved
everything. There is nothing greater than faith.

(To Kedar) \"You must have heard about the tremendous power of faith. It
is said in the purana that Rāma, who was God Himself - the embodiment of
Absolute Brahman - had to build a bridge to cross the sea to Ceylon. But
Hanuman, trusting in Rama\'s name, cleared the sea in one jump and
reached the other side. He had no need of a bridge. (All laugh)

\"Once a man was about to cross the sea. Bibhishana wrote Rama\'s name
on a leaf, tied it in a corner of the man\'s wearing-cloth, and said to
him: \'Don\'t be afraid. Have faith and walk on the water. But look
here - the moment you lose faith you will be drowned.\' The man was
walking easily on the water. Suddenly he had an intense desire to see
what was tied in his cloth. He opened it and found only a leaf with the
name of Rāma written on it. \'What is this?\' he thought. \'Just the
name of Rāma!\' As soon as doubt entered his mind he sank under the
water.

\"If a man has faith in God, then even if he has committed the most
heinous sins - such as killing a cow, a brahmin, or a woman - he will
certainly be saved through his faith. Let him only say to God, \'O Lord,
I Will not repeat such an action\', and he need not be afraid of
anything.\"

When he had said this, the Master sang:

> *If only I can pass away repeating Durga\'s name,*
>
> *How canst Thou then, O Blessed One,*
>
> *Withhold from me deliverance,*
>
> *Wretched though I may be?*
>
> *1 may have stolen a drink of wine, or killed a child unborn, Or slain
> a woman or a cow,*
>
> *Or even caused a brahmin\'s death;*
>
> *But, though it all be true,*
>
> *Nothing of this can make me feel the least uneasiness;*
>
> *For through the power of Thy sweet name*
>
> *My wretched soul may still aspire*
>
> *Even to Brahmanhood.*

**Parable of the homa bird**

Pointing to Narendra, the Master said: \"You all see this boy. He
behaves that way here. A naughty boy seems very gentle when with his
father. But he is quite another person when he plays in the chandni.
Narendra and people of his type belong to the class of the ever-free.
They are never entangled in the world. When they grow a little older
they feel the awakening of inner consciousness and go directly toward
God. They come to the world only to teach others. They never care for
anything of the world. They are never attached to \'woman and gold\'.

\"The Vedas speak of the homa bird. It lives high up in the sky and
there it lays its egg. As soon as the egg is laid it begins to fall; but
it is so high up that it continues to fall for many days. As it falls it
hatches, and the chick falls. As the chick falls its eyes open; it grows
wings. As soon as its eyes open, it realizes that it is falling and will
be dashed to pieces on touching the earth. Then it at once shoots up
toward the mother bird high in the sky.\"

At this point Narendra left the room. Kedar, Prankrishna, M., and many
others remained.

**Master praises Narendra**

MASTER: \"You see, Narendra excels in singing, playing on instruments,
study, and everything. The other day he had a discussion with Kedar and
tore his arguments to shreds. (All laugh.)

(To M.) \"Is there any book in English on reasoning?\"

23. \"Yes, sir, there is. It is called Logic.\" MASTER: \"Tell me what
    it says.\"

M. was a little embarrassed. He said: \"One part of the book deals with
deduction from the general to the

particular. For example: All men are mortal. Scholars are men. Therefore
scholars are mortal. Another part

deals with the method of reasoning from the particular to the general.
For example: This crow is black. That crow is black. The crows we see
everywhere are black. Therefore all crows are black. But there may be a
fallacy in a conclusion arrived at in this way; for on inquiry one may
find a white crow in some country. There is another illustration: If
there is rain, there is, or has been, a cloud. Therefore rain comes from
a cloud. Still another example: This man has thirty-two teeth. That man
has thirty-two teeth. All the men we see have thirty-two teeth.
Therefore men have thirty-two teeth. English logic deals with such
inductions and deductions.\"

Sri Ramakrishna barely heard these words. While listening he became
absent-minded. So the conversation did not proceed far.

When the meeting broke up, the devotees sauntered in the temple garden.
M. went in the direction of the Panchavati. It was about five o\'clock
in the afternoon. After a while he returned to the Master\'s room.
There, on the small north verandah, he witnessed an amazing sight.

Sri Ramakrishna was standing still, surrounded by a few devotees, and
Narendra was singing. M. had never heard anyone except the Master sing
so sweetly. When he looked at Sri Ramakrishna he was struck with wonder;
for the Master stood motionless, with eyes transfixed. He seemed not
even to breathe. A devotee told M. that the Master was in samadhi. M.
had never before seen or heard of such a thing. Silent with wonder, he
thought: \"Is it possible for a man to be so oblivious of the outer
world in the consciousness of God? How deep his faith and devotion must
be to bring about such a state!\"

Narendra was singing:

> *Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord Hari,*
>
> *The Stainless One, Pure Spirit through and through.*
>
> *How peerless is the Light that in Him shines!*
>
> *How soul-bewitching is His wondrous form!*
>
> *How dear is He to all His devotees!*
>
> *Ever more beauteous in fresh-blossoming love*
>
> *That shames the splendour of a million moons,*
>
> *Like lightning gleams the glory of His form,*
>
> *Raising erect the hair for very joy.*

The Master shuddered when this last line was sung. His hair stood on
end, and tears of joy streamed down his cheeks. Now and then his lips
parted in a smile. Was he seeing the peerless beauty of God, \"that
shames the splendour of a million moons\"? Was this the vision of God,
the Essence of Spirit? How much austerity and discipline, how much faith
and devotion, must be necessary for such a vision!

The song went on:

> *Worship His feet in the lotus of your heart;*
>
> *With mind serene and eyes made radiant*
>
> *With heavenly love, behold that matchless sight.*

Again that bewitching smile. The body motionless as before, the eyes
half Shut, as if beholding a strange inner vision.

The song drew to a close. Narendra sang the last lines:

> *Caught in the spell of His love\'s ecstasy,*
>
> *Immerse yourself for evermore, O mind\"*
>
> *In Him who is Pure Knowledge and Pure Bliss.*

The sight of the samadhi, and the divine bliss he had witnessed, left an
indelible impression on M.\'s mind. He returned home deeply moved. Now
and then he could hear within himself the echo of those
soul-intoxicating lines:

> *Immerse yourself for evermore, O mind,*
>
> *In Him who is Pure Knowledge and Pure Bliss.*

**Fourth visit**

The next day, too, was a holiday for M. He arrived at Dakshineswar at
three o\'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna was in his room;
Narendra, Bhavanath, and a few other devotees were sitting on a mat
spread on the floor. They were all young men of nineteen or twenty.
Seated on the small couch, Sri Ramakrishna was talking with them and
smiling.

No sooner had M. entered the room than the Master laughed aloud and said
to the boys, \"There! He has come again.\" They all joined in the
laughter. M. bowed low before him and took a seat. Before this he had
saluted the Master with folded hands, like one with an English
education. But that day he learnt to fall down at his feet in orthodox
Hindu fashion.

**The peacock and the opium**

Presently the Master explained the cause of his laughter to the
devotees, He said: \"A man once fed a peacock with a pill of opium at
four o\'clock in the afternoon. The next day, exactly at that time, the
peacock came back. It had felt the intoxication of the drug and returned
just in time to have another dose.\"(All laugh.)

M. thought this a very apt Ramakrishna for a moment. he should go again.

illustration. Even at home he had been unable to banish the thought of
Sri His mind was constantly at Dakshineswar and he had counted the
minutes until

In the mean time the Master was having great fun with the boys, treating
them as if they were his most intimate friends. Peals of side-splitting
laughter filled the room, as if it were a mart of joy. The whole thing
was a revelation to M. He thought: \"Didn\'t I see him only yesterday
intoxicated with God? Wasn\'t he swimming then in the Ocean of Divine
Love - a sight I had never seen before? And today the same person is
behaving like an ordinary man! Wasn\'t it he who scolded me on the first
day of my coming here? Didn\'t he admonish me, saying, \'And you are a
man of knowledge!\'? Wasn\'t it he who said to me that God with form is
as true as God without form? Didn\'t he tell me that God alone is real
and all else illusory? Wasn\'t it he who advised me

to live in the world unattached, like a maidservant in a rich man\'s
house?\"

Sri Ramakrishna was having great fun with the young devotees; now and
then he glanced at M. He noticed that M. sat in silence. The Master said
to Ramlal: \"You see, he is a little advanced in years, and therefore
somewhat serious. He sits quiet while the youngsters are making merry.\"
M. was then about twenty-eight years old.

**Hanuman\'s devotion to Rāma**

The conversation drifted to Hanuman, whose picture hung on the wall in
the Master\'s room.

Sri Ramakrishna said: \"Just imagine Hanuman\'s state of mind. He
didn\'t care for money, honour, creature comforts, or anything else. He
longed only for God. When he was running away with the heavenly weapon
that had been secreted in the crystal pillar, Mandodari began to tempt
him with various fruits so that he might come down and drop the weapon.5
But he couldn\'t be tricked so easily. In reply to her persuasions he
sang this song:

> *Am I in need of fruit?*
>
> *I have the Fruit that makes this life*
>
> *Fruitful indeed. Within my heart*
>
> *The Tree of Rāma grows,*
>
> *Bearing salvation for its fruit.*
>
> *Under the Wish-fulfilling Tree*
>
> *Of Rāma do I sit at ease,*
>
> *Plucking whatever fruit I will.*
>
> *But if you speak of fruit -*
>
> *No beggar, I, for common fruit.*
>
> *Behold, I go,*
>
> *Leaving a bitter fruit for you.\"*

As Sri Ramakrishna was singing the song he went into samadhi. Again the
half-closed eyes and motionless body that one sees in his photograph.
Just a minute before, the devotees had been making merry in his company.
Now all eyes were riveted on him. Thus for the second time M. saw the
Master in samadhi.

After a long time the Master came back to ordinary consciousness. His
face lighted up with a smile, and his body relaxed; his senses began to
function in a normal way. He shed tears of joy as he repeated the holy
name of Rāma. M. wondered whether this very saint was the person who a
few minutes earlier had been behaving like a child of five.

The Master said to Narendra and M., \"I should like to hear you speak
and argue in English.\" They both laughed. But they continued to talk in
their mother tongue. It was impossible for M. to argue any more before
the Master. Though Ramakrishna insisted, they did not talk in English.

At five o\'clock in the afternoon all the devotees except Narendra and
M. took leave of the Master. As M. was walking in the temple garden, he
suddenly came upon the Master talking to Narendra on the bank of the
goose-pond. Sri Ramakrishna said to Narendra: \"Look here. Come a little
more often. You are a new-comer. On first acquaintance people visit each
other quite often, as is the case with a lover and his sweetheart.
(Narendra and M. laugh.) So please come, won\'t you?\"

Narendra, a member of the Brahmo Samaj, was very particular about his
promises. He said with a smile, \"Yes, sir, I shall try.\"

As they were returning to the Master\'s room, Sri Ramakrishna said to
M.: \"When peasants go to market to buy bullocks for their ploughs, they
can easily tell the good from the bad by touching their tails. On being
touched

there, some meekly lie down on the ground. The peasants recognize that
these are without mettle and so reject them. They select only those
bullocks that frisk about and show spirit when their tails are touched.
Narendra is like a bullock of this latter class. He is full of spirit
within.\"

The Master smiled as he said this, and continued: \"There are some
people who have no grit whatever. They are like flattened rice soaked in
milk - soft and mushy. No inner strength!\"

It was dusk. The Master was meditating on God. He said to M.: \"Go and
talk to Narendra. Then tell me what you think of him.\"

Evening worship was over in the temples. M. met Narendra on the bank of
the Ganges and they began to converse. Narendra told M. about his
studying in college, his being a member of the Brahmo Samaj, and so on.

It was now late in the evening and time for M.\'s departure; but he felt
reluctant to go and instead went in search of Sri Ramakrishna. He had
been fascinated by the Master\'s singing and wanted to hear more. At
last he found the Master pacing alone in the natmandir in front of the
Kali temple. A lamp was burning in the temple on either side of the
image of the Divine Mother. The single lamp in the spacious natmandir
blended light and darkness into a kind of mystic twilight, in which the
figure of the Master could be dimly seen.

M. had been enchanted by the Master\'s sweet music. With some hesitation
he asked him whether there would be any more singing that evening. \"No,
not tonight\", said Sri Ramakrishna after a little reflection. Then, as
if remembering something, he added: \"But I\'m going soon to Balarām
Bose\'s house in Calcutta. Come there and you\'ll hear me sing.\" M.
agreed to go.

MASTER. \"Do you know Balarām Bose?\"

M: \"No, sir. I don\'t.\"

MASTER: \"He lives in Bosepara.\"

M: \"Well, sir, I shall find him.\"

As Sri Ramakrishna walked up and down the hall with M., he said to him:
\"Let me ask you something. What do you think of me?\"

M. remained silent. Again Sri Ramakrishna asked: \"What do you think of
me? How many annas of knowledge of God have I?\"

5888. \"I don\'t understand what you mean by \'annas\'. But of this I am
      sure: I have never before seen such knowledge, ecstatic love,
      faith in God, renunciation, and catholicity anywhere.\"

The Master laughed.

M. bowed low before him and took his leave. He had gone as far as the
main gate of the temple garden when he suddenly remembered something and
came back to Sri Ramakrishna, who was still in the natmandir. In the dim
light the Master, all alone, was pacing the hall, rejoicing in the Self
as the lion lives and roams alone in the forest.

In silent wonder M. surveyed that great soul.

MASTER (to M.): \"What makes you come back?\"

1.  \"Perhaps the house you asked me to go to belongs to a rich man.
    They may not let me in. I think I had better not go. I would rather
    meet you here.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, no! Why should you think that? Just mention my name. Say
that you want to see me; then someone will take you to me.\"

M. nodded his assent and, after saluting the Master, took his leave.

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 2**