
THE DURGA PUJA FESTIVAL

> Friday, September 26, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA had come to Calcutta. It was the first day of the Durga
Puja, the great religious festival, and the Hindus of the metropolis
were celebrating it. The Master intended to visit the image of the
Divine Mother at Adhar\'s house. He also wanted to see Shivanath, the
Brahmo devotee.

It was about midday. Umbrella in hand, M. was pacing the foot-path in
front of the Brahmo Samaj temple. Two hours had passed but the Master
had not yet appeared. Now and then M. sat down on the steps of Dr.
Mahalnavish\'s dispensary and watched the joy and mirth of the people,
young and old, who were celebrating the Puja.

A little after three the Master\'s carriage drove up. As soon as Sri
Ramakrishna stepped out he saluted the temple of the Brahmo Samaj with
folded hands. Hazra and a few other devotees were with him. M. bowed
before the Master and took the dust of his feet. The Master told him
that he was going to Shivanath\'s house. A few minutes later several
members of the Brahmo Samaj came and took him to Shivanath\'s. But
Shivanath was not at home. Shortly afterwards Vijay Goswami,
Mahalnavish, and several other Brahmo leaders greeted the Master and
took him inside the Brahmo temple.

Sri Ramakrishna was in a happy mood. He was given a seat below the
altar. There the Brahmo devotees sang their devotional music. Vijay and
the Brahmo devotees sat in front of the Master.

MASTER (to Vijay, with a smile): \"I was told that you had put up a
\'signboard\' here that people belonging to other faiths are not allowed
to come in. Narendra, too, said to me: \'You shouldn\'t go to the Brahmo
Samiij. You had better visit Shivanath\'s house.\'

**Master\'s catholicity**

\"But I say that we are all calling on the same God. Jealousy and malice
need not be. Some say that God is formless,and some that God has form. I
say, let one man meditate on God with form if he believes in form, and
let another meditate on the formless Deity if he does not believe in
form. What I mean is that dogmatism is not good. It is not good to feel
that my religion alone is true and other religions are false. The
correct attitude is this: My religion is right, but I do not know
whether other religions are right or wrong, true or false. I say this
because one cannot know the true nature of God unless one realizes Him.
Kabir used to say: \'God with form is my Mother, the Formless is my
Father. Which shall I blame? Which shall I praise? The two pans of the
scales are equally heay.\'

**Different paths for different temperaments**

\"Hindus, Mussalmans, Christians, Saktas, Saivas, Vaishnavas, the
Brahmajnanis of the time of the rishis, and you, the Brahmajnanis of
modern times, all seek the same object. A mother prepares dishes to suit
the stomachs of her children. Suppose a mother has five children and a
fish is bought for the family. She doesn\'t cook pilau or kalia for all
of them. All have not the same power of digestion; so she prepares a
simple stew for some. But she loves all her children equally.

\"Do you know my attitude? I love all the preparations of fish. I have a
womanly nature (all laugh). I feel myself at home with every dish-fried
fish, fish cooked with turmeric powder, pickled fish. And further, I
equally relish rich preparations like fish-head, kalia, and pilau. (all
laugh)

\"Do you know what the truth is? God has made different religions to
suit different aspirants, times, and countries. All doctrines are only
so many paths; but a path is by no means God Himself. Indeed, one can
reach God if one follows any of the paths with whole-hearted devotion.
Suppose there are errors in the religion that

one has accepted; if one is sincere and earnest, then God Himself will
correct those errors. Suppose a man has set out with a sincere desire to
visit Jagannath at Puri and by mistake has gone north instead of south;
then certainly someone meeting him on the way will tell him: \'My good
fellow, don\'t go that way. Go to the south.\' And the man will reach
Jagannath sooner or later.

\"If there are errors in other religions, that is none of our business.
God, to whom the world belongs, takes care of that. Our duty is somehow
to visit Jagannath. (To the Brahmos) The view you hold is good indeed.
You describe God as formless. That is fine. One may eat a cake with
icing, either straight or sidewise. It will taste sweet either way.

**Dogmatism condemned**

\"But dogmatism is not good. You have no doubt heard the story of the
chameleon. A man entered a wood and saw a chameleon on a tree. He
reported to his friends, \'I have seen a red lizard.\' He was firmly
convinced that it was nothing but red. Another person, after visiting
the tree, said, \'I have seen a green lizard.\' He was firmly convinced
that it was nothing but green. But the man who lived under the tree
said: \'What both of you have said is true. But the fact is that the
creature is sometimes red, sometimes green, sometimes yellow, and
sometimes has no colour at all.\'

\"God has been described in the Vedas as both with attributes and
without. You describe Him as without form only. That is one-sided. But
never mind. If you know one of His aspects truly, you will be able to
know His other aspects too. God Himself will tell you all about them.
(Pointing to two or three Brahmo devotees) Those who come to your Samaj
know both this gentleman and that.\"

**Encouragement to Vijay**

Vijay still belonged to the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj. He was a salaried
preacher of that organization but could not obey all its rules and
regulations. He mixed with those who believed in God with form. This was
creating a misunderstanding between him and the Brahmo authorities. Many
Brahmos disapproved of his conduct. The Master suddenly looked at Vijay
and began to talk to him.

MASTER (to Vijay, smiling): \"I understand that they have been finding
fault with you for mixing with those who believe in God with form. Is
that true? He who is a devotee of God must have an understanding that
cannot be shaken under any conditions. He must be like the anvil in a
blacksmith\'s shop. It is constantly being struck by the hammer; still
it is unshaken. Bad people may abuse you very much and speak ill of you;
but you must bear with them all if you sincerely seek God. Isn\'t it
possible to think of God in the midst of the wicked? Just think of the
rishis of ancient times. They used to meditate on God in the forest,
surrounded on all sides by tigers, bears, and other ferocious beasts.
Wicked men have the nature of tigers and bears. They will pursue you to
do you an injury.

**How to deal with wicked people**

\"One must be careful about these few things. First, an influential man
who has much money and many men under his control. He can injure you if
he wants; you must be careful while talking to him; perhaps you may have
to approve what he says. Second, a dog. When it chases you or barks at
you, you must stand still, talk to it gently, and pacify it. Third, a
bull. If it runs after you with lowered horns, you must calm it with a
gentle voice. Fourth, a drunkard. If you arouse his anger, he will abuse
you, naming fourteen generations of your family. You should say to him:
\'Hello uncle! How are you?\' Then he will be mightily pleased and sit
by you and smoke.

\"In the presence of a wicked person I become alert. If such a man asks
me whether I have a pipe for smoking, I say, \'Yes, I have.\' Some
people have the nature of a snake: they will bite you without warning.
You have to discriminate a great deal in order to avoid the bite;
otherwise your passion will be stirred up to such an extent that you
will feel like doing injury in return. The companionship of a holy man
is greatly needed now and then. It enables one to discriminate between
the Real and the unreal.\"

VIJAY: \"I have no time, sir. I am entangled in my duties here.\"

MASTER: \"You are a religious teacher. Others have holidays, but not so
a religious teacher. When the manager of an estate brings order to one
part of it, the landlord sends him to another part. So you have no
leisure.\" (all laugh)

VIJAY (with folded hands): \"Sir, please give me your blessing.\"

MASTER: \"Now you are talking like an ignorant person. It is God alone
who blesses.\"

VIJAY: \"Revered sir, please give us some instruction.\"

The Master glanced around the Brahmo temple and said with a smile,
\"This is nice too-a mixture of crystals and syrup. There are crystals,
and there is syrup too.

\"I have scored too many points and am therefore out of the game (all
laugh). Do you know the game called \'nax\'? It is a game of cards, and
anyone scoring above seventeen is out of the game. Those who score fewer
points-say five, seven, or ten-are clever. I have scored too many and am
out of the game.

\"Once Keshab Sen gave a lecture at his house. I was present. Many
people were there. The ladies were seated behind the screen. Keshab, in
the course of his talk, said, \'O God, please bless us that we may dive
and disappear altogether in the river of bhakti.\' I said to Keshab with
a smile: \'If you disappear altogether in the river of bhakti, then what
will be the fate of those behind the screen? By all means dive into the
river, but you had better come back to dry land now and then: Don\'t
disappear in the river altogether.\' At these words Keshab and the
others burst out laughing.

\"Never mind. One can realize God in the world, too, if only one is
sincere. \'I\' and \'mine\'-that is ignorance. But, \'O God! Thou and
Thine\'-that is knowledge.

**Advice to householders**

\"Live in the world like a maidservant in a rich man\'s house. She
performs all the household duties, brings up her master\'s child, and
speaks of him as \'my Hari\'. But in her heart she knows quite well that
neither the house nor the child belongs to her. She performs all her
duties, but just the same her mind dwells on her native place. Likewise,
do your worldly duties but fix your mind on God. And know that house,
family, and son do not belong to you; they are God\'s. You are only His
servant.

\"I ask people to renounce mentally. I do not ask them to give up the
world. If one lives in the world unattached and seeks God with
sincerity, then one is able to attain Him.

(To Vijay) \"There was a time when I too would meditate on God with my
eyes closed. Then I said to myself: \'Does God exist only when I think
of Him with my eyes closed? Doesn\'t He exist when I look around with my
eyes open?\' Now, when I look around with my eyes open, I see that God
dwells in all beings. He is the Indwelling Spirit of all-men, animals
and other living beings, trees and plants, sun and moon, land and water.

\"Why do I seek Shivanath? He who meditates on God for many days has
substance in him, has divine power in him. Further, he who sings well,
plays well on a musical instrument, or has mastered anyone art, has in
him real substance and the power of God. This is the view of the Gitā.
It is said in the Chandi that he who is endowed with physical beauty has
in him substance and the power of God. (To Vijay) Ah, what a beautiful
nature Kedār has! No sooner does he come to me than he bursts into
tears. His eyes are always red and swim in tears, like a chanabara in
syrup.\"

VIJAY: \"At Dāccā he is constantly talking about you. He is always eager
to see you.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was about to depart. The Brahmo devotees bowed low
before him and he returned their salute. Then, getting into the
carriage, he set out for Adhar\'s house to see the image of the Divine
Mother.

**Sunday, September 28, 1884**

It was the day of the Mahāshtami, the most auspicious day of the worship
of Durga, the Divine Mother. At Adhar\'s invitation Sri Ramakrishna had
come to Calcutta to see the holy image at his house. Before going there
he went to Ram\'s. Many devotees, including Narendra, Baburam, M.,
Niranjan, Vijay, Kedār, Ram, and Surendra, were present. Balarām and
Rākhāl were still at Vrindāvan.

MASTER (looking at Vijay and Kedār, with a smile): \"This is a nice
reunion today. You two have the same spiritual mood. (To Vijay) Well,
what about Shivanath? Did you-?\"

VIJAY: \"Yes, sir, he heard that you had been to his house. I haven\'t
seen him, but I sent him word. He knows about it.\"

MASTER (to Vijay and the others); \"Four desires have come into my mind.
I shall eat fish curry cooked with egg-plant. I shall visit Shivanath.
The devotees will repeat the name of Hari over their beads, and I shall
watch them. And the Tantrik devotees will drink consecrated wine, eight
*ānnās* worth, on the ashtami day, and I shall watch them and salute
them.\"

Narendra was seated in front of the Master. He was about twenty-two
years old. While Sri Ramakrishna was talking thus his eyes fell upon his
beloved disciple. At once the Master stood up and went into samādhi. He
placed one foot on Narendra\'s knee. He was in a deep spiritual mood,
his eyes unblinking, his mind completely unconscious of the outer world.
After a long time he came down to the relative plane of consciousness;
but he still appeared dazed, for the intoxication of divine bliss had
not altogether left him. Speaking to himself in that ecstatic state, he
repeated the name of God. He said: \"Satchidananda! Satchidananda!
Satchidananda! Shall I repeat that? No, it is the day of the Divine
Mother, the Giver of the bliss of divine inebriation. O Mother, full of
the bliss of divine inebriation! Sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, ni. It is not
good to keep the voice on \'ni\'. It is not possible to keep it there
very long. I shall keep it on the next lower note.

**Difference between ordinary men and Incarnations**

\"There are different planes of consciousness: the gross, the subtle,
the causal, and the Great Cause. Entering the Mahakarana, the Great
Cause, one becomes silent; one cannot utter a word.

\"But an Isvarakoti, after attaining the Great Cause, can come down
again to the lower planes. Incarnations of God, and others like them,
belong to the class of the Isvarakotis. They climb up, and they can also
come down. They climb to the roof, and they can come down again by the
stairs and move about on a lower floor. It is a case of negation and
affirmation. There is, for instance, the seven-storey palace of a king.
Strangers have access only to the lower apartments; but the prince, who
knows the palace to be his own, can move up and down from floor to
floor. There is a kind of rocket that throws out sparks in one pattern
and then seems to go out. After a moment it makes another pattern, and
then still another. There is no end to the patterns it can make. But
there is another kind of rocket that, when it is lighted, makes only a
dull sound, throws out a few sparks, and then goes out altogether. Like
this second kind, an ordinary jiva, after much spiritual effort, can go
to a higher plane; but he cannot come down to tell others his
experiences. After much effort he may go into samādhi; but he cannot
climb down from that state or tell others what he has seen there.

**Nature of the ever-perfect**

\"There is a class of devotees, the nityasiddhas, the ever-perfect. From
their very birth they seek God. They do not enjoy anything of the world.

**Illustration of homa bird**

The Vedas speak of the homa bird. It lives very high in the sky. There
the mother bird lays her egg. She lives so high that the egg falls for
many days. While falling it is hatched. The chick continues to fall.
That also goes on for many days. In the mean time the chick develops
eyes. Coming near the earth, it becomes conscious of the world. It
realizes it will meet certain death if it hits the ground. Then it gives
a shrill cry and shoots up toward its mother. The earth means death, and
it frightens the young bird; it then seeks its mother. She

dwells high up in the sky, and the young bird shoots straight up in that
direction. It doesn\'t look anywhere else.

\"Those who are born as the companions of an Incarnation of God are
eternally perfect. For some of them that birth is the last.

(To Vijay) \"You have both-yoga and bhoga. King Janaka also had yoga and
bhoga. Therefore he is called a rajarshi, both king and seer. Nārada was
a devarshi, and Sukadeva a brahmarshi. Yes, Sukadeva was a brahmarshi.
He was not a mere Jnāni; he was the very embodiment of Jnāna, Divine
Knowledge. Whom do I call a Jnāni? A man who has attained Knowledge and
has done so after much effort. Sukadeva was the very image of Knowledge,
in other words, a form of concentrated Knowledge. He attained Knowledge
spontaneously, without any labour.\"

Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna came down to the normal mood. Then he
talked freely with the devotees. The Master asked Kedār to sing.

Kedār sang:

> *How shall I open my heart, O friend?*
>
> *It is forbidden me to speak.*
>
> *I am about to die, for lack of a kindred soul*
>
> *To understand my misery. . . .*

Kedār sang several other songs. After the music the Master again talked
to the devotees. Nandalal, Keshab\'s nephew, was also present with a few
brahmo friends. They were sitting near the Master.

MASTER (to Vijay and the other devotees): \"A man brought a bottle of
consecrated wine for me; but I couldn\'t even touch it.\"

VIJAY: \"Ah!\"

MASTER: \"I become intoxicated at the mere thought of God. I don\'t have
to take any wine. I feel drunk at the very sight of the charanamrita. I
feel as if I had drunk five bottles of liquor. When a person attains
such a state he cannot help discriminating about food.\"

NARENDRA: \"As regards food, one should take whatever comes.\"

MASTER: \"What you say applies only to a particular state of the
aspirant\'s mind. No food can harm a Jnāni.

According to the Gitā, the Jnāni himself does not eat; his eating is an
offering to the Kundalini. But that does not apply to a bhakta. The
present state of my mind is such that I cannot eat any food unless it is
first offered to God by a brahmin priest. Formerly my state of mind was
such that I would enjoy inhaling the smell of burning corpses, carried
by the wind from the other side of the Ganges. It tasted very sweet to
me. But nowadays I cannot eat food touched by anybody and everybody. No,
I cannot. But once in a while I do. One day I was taken to see a
performance of a play at Keshab\'s house. They gave me luchi and curries
to eat. I didn\'t know whether the food was handed to me by a washerman
or a barber; but I ate quite a little (all laugh). Rākhāl had asked me
to eat.

(To Narendra) \"With you it is all right. You are in \'this\' as well as
in \'that\'. You can eat everything now. (To the devotees) Blessed is he
who feels longing for God, though he eats pork. But shame on him whose
mind dwells on \'woman and gold\', though he eats the purest food-boiled
vegetables, rice, and ghee.

\"Once I had a desire to eat dal cooked in a blacksmith\'s house. From
my childhood I had heard the blacksmiths say, \'Do the brahmins know how
to cook?\' I ate the dal, but it smelt of the blacksmith. (all laugh)

\"I received the Allah mantra from Govinda Rai. Rice was cooked for me
with onions in the kuthi. I ate some. I ate curry in Mani Mallick\'s
garden house, but I felt a kind of repulsion to it.

\"When I went to Kamarpukur, Ramlal\'s father was frightened. He thought
I might eat at any and every house.

He was frightened to think I might be expelled from the caste; so I
couldn\'t stay long. I came away.

\"Both the Vedas and the Puranas describe pure food and conduct. But
what the Vedas and the Puranas ask people to shun as impure is extolled
by the Tantra as good.

**Master\'s divine madness**

\"Oh, what a state of mind I passed through! I would open my mouth,
touching, as it were, heaven and the nether world with my jaws, and
utter the word \'Ma\'. I felt that I had seized the Mother, like a
fisherman dragging fish in his net. Let me recite a song:

> *This time I shall devour Thee utterly, Mother Kāli!*
>
> *For I was born under an evil star,*
>
> *And one so born becomes, they say, the eater of his mother.*
>
> *Thou must devour me first, or I myself shall eat Thee up;*
>
> *One or the other it must be.*
>
> *I shall besmear my hands with black, and with black my face;*
>
> *With black I shall besmear the whole of my body*
>
> *And when Death seizes me, with black I shall besmear his face.*
>
> *O Mother, I shall eat Thee up but not digest Thee;*
>
> *I shall install Thee in my heart*
>
> *And make Thee offerings with my mind.*
>
> *You may say that by eating Kāli I shall embroil myself*
>
> *With Kala, Her Husband, but I am not afraid;*
>
> *Braving His anger, I shall chant my Mother\'s name.*
>
> *To show the world that Ramprasad is Kāli\'s rightful son,*
>
> *Come what may, I shall eat Thee up-Thee and Thy retinue-*
>
> *Or lose my life attempting it.*

*\"I almost became mad-such was my longing for God.\"*

Narendra began to sing:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason? . . .*

Listening to the song, the Master again went into samādhi. Coming down
to the normal plane, he assumed the attitude of Girirani and sang the
*Āgamani*. He sang, intoxicated with divine love:

Tell me, my Uma, how have you fared, alone in the Stranger\'s house? . .
.

He said to the devotees, \"Today is the Mahashtami. The Mother has come;
that is why I feel such an awakening of spiritual emotion.\"

KEDĀR: \"Lord, you are here. Are you different from the Divine Mother?\"

Sri Ramakrishna looked in another direction and sang in an absent-minded
mood:

Ah, friend! I have not found Him yet, whose love has driven me mad\....

Again he became ecstatic and sang of the Divine Mother. As he sang,
Vijay suddenly stood up crying the name of Hari. Sri Ramakrishna, full
of divine love, began to dance with Vijay and the other devotees.

The music was over. The Master, Vijay, Narendra, and the other devotees
sat down. All eyes were fixed on Sri Ramakrishna, who began conversing
with the devotees. He asked about their health. Kedār spoke to him
humbly in a soft, sweet voice. Narendra, Chunilal, Ram, M., and Harish
were sitting by the Master.

KEDĀR (humbly): \"How can I get rid of my dizziness?\"

MASTER (tenderly): \"One gets that. I have had it myself.

Use a little almond oil. I have heard that it cures dizziness.\"

KEDĀR: \"I shall, sir.\"

MASTER (to Chunilal): \"Hello! How is everything?\"

CHUNILAL: \"Everything is all right with us now. Balarām Babu and Rākhāl
are well at Vrindāvan.\"

MASTER: \"Why have you sent so many sweetmeats? (To Harish) Wait a day
or two before coming to Dakshineswar. You are not well. You may fall ill
again there. (To Narayan, tenderly) Sit here. Sit by me. Come to
Dakshineswar tomorrow and have your meal there. (Pointing to M.) Come
with him. (To M.) What do you say?\"

M. wanted to accompany Sri Ramakrishna to Dakshineswar that very day. He
became thoughtful.

Surendra stood near Sri Ramakrishna. He was in the habit of drinking and
often went to excess. This had worried the Master greatly, but he had
not asked Surendra to give up drinking altogether. He had said to him:
\"Look here, Surendra! Whenever you drink wine, offer it beforehand to
the Divine Mother. See that your brain doesnt become clouded and that
you don\'t reel The more you think of the Divine Mother, the less you
will like to drink The Mother is the Giver of the bliss of divine
inebriation. Realizing Her, one feels a natural bliss.\"

The Master looked at Surendra and said, \"You have had a drink.\" With
these words he went into samādhi. It was dusk. Regaining partial
consciousness, the Master sang:

> *Behold my Mother playing with Śiva, lost in an ecstasy of joy!*
>
> *Drunk with a draught of celestial wine, She reels, and yet She does
> not fall. . .*

Then he chanted the name of Hari, clapping his hands occasionally. In a
sweet voice he said: \"Hari! Hari! O

mind, chant the name of Hari! Sing the name of Hari!\" Then he chanted:
\"Rāma! Rāma Rāma! Rāma!\"

Now the Master began to pray: \"O Rāma! O Rāma! I am without devotion
and austerity, without knowledge and love; I have not performed any
religious rites. O Rāma, I have taken refuge in Thee; I have taken
shelter at Thy feet. I do not want creature comforts; I do not seek name
and fame. O Rāma, I do not crave the eight occult powers; I do not care
for a hundred occult powers! I am Thy servant. I have taken refuge in
Thee. Grant, O Rāma, that I may have pure love for Thy Lotus Feet; that
I may not be deluded by Thy world-bewitching māyā! O Rāma, I have taken
refuge it Thee.\"

As the Master prayed all eyes were turned toward him. Hearing his
piteous voice, few could restrain their tears.

Ramchandra Dutta came in and stood near him.

MASTER: \"Where have you been, Ram?\"

RAM: \"I was upstairs, sir.\"

Ram had been making arrangements for feeding the devotees on the roof of
the house.

MASTER (to Ram, with a smile): \"Isn\'t it better to stay down below
that to be high up? Water accumulates in low land but flows down from a
high mound.\"

RAM (with a smile): \"That is true, sir.\"

Supper was ready on the roof. Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees were
taken there and sumptuously fed. Later the Master went to Adhar\'s house
with M., Niranjan, and others. The Divine Mother was being worshipped
there, It had been Adhar\'s earnest prayer that on this sacred day Sri
Ramakrishna might bless his house with his presence.

**Monday, September 29, 1884**

It was the third day of the Durga Puja. The Master had been awake in his
room at Dakshineswar since early morning. The morning worship in the
Kāli temple was over and the orchestra had played the morning melodies
in the nahabat. Brahmans and gardeners, basket in hand, were plucking
flowers for the worship of the Divine Mother. Bhavanath, Baburam,
Niranjan, and M. had spent the night at Dakshineswar, sleeping on the
porch of the Master\'s room. As soon as they awoke they saw Sri
Ramakrishna dancing in an ecstatic mood. He was chanting: \"Victory to
Mother Durga! Hallowed be the name of Durga!\" He was naked and looked
like a child as he chanted the name of the Blissful Mother. After a few
moments he said: \"Oh, the bliss of divine ecstasy! Oh, the bliss of
divine drunkenness!\" Then he repeatedly chanted the name of Govinda:
\"O Govinda! My life! My soul!\"

The devotees sat on their beds and with unwinking eyes watched Sri
Ramakrishna\'s spiritual mood. Hazra was living at the temple garden.
Lātu was also living there to render the Master personal service. Rākhāl
was still at Vrindāvan. Narendra visited Sri Ramakrishna now and then.
He was expected that day.

The devotees washed their faces. The Master took his seat on a mat on
the north verandah. Bhavanath and M.

sat beside him. Other devotees were coming in and out of the room.

MASTER (to Bhavanath): \"The truth is that ordinary men cannot easily
have faith. But an Isvarakoti\'s faith is spontaneous. Prahlada burst
into tears while writing the letter \'ka\'. It reminded him of Krishna.
It is the nature of jivas to doubt. They say yes, no doubt, but-

**Oneness of Śakti and Brahman**

\"Hazra can never be persuaded to believe that Brahman and Śakti, that
Śakti and the Being endowed with Śakti, are one and the same. When the
Reality appears as Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer, we call It Śakti;
when It is inactive, we call It Brahman. But really It is one and the
same thing-indivisible. Fire naturally brings to mind its power to burn;
and the idea of burning naturally brings to mind the idea of fire. It is
impossible to think of the one without the other.

\"So I prayed to the Divine Mother: \'O Mother! Hazra is trying to upset
the views of this place. Either give him right understanding or take him
from here.\' The next day he carne to me and said, \'Yes, I agree with
you.\' He said that God exists everywhere as All-pervading
Consciousness.\"

BHAVANATH (smiling): \"Did what Hazra said really make you suffer so
much?\"

MASTER: \"You see, I am now in a different mood. I can\'t shout and
carry on heated discussions with people. I am not in a mood now to argue
and quarrel with Hazra. Hriday said to me at Jadu Mallick\'s garden
house, \'Uncle, don\'t you want to keep me with you?\' \'No,\' I said,
\'I am no longer in a mood to get into heated arguments with you.\'

**Knowledge and ignorance**

\"What is knowledge and what is ignorance? A man is ignorant so long as
he feels that God is far away. He has knowledge when he knows that God
is here and everywhere.

**Childlike faith**

\"When a man has true knowledge he feels that everything is filled with
Consciousness. At Kamarpukur I used to talk to Shibu, who was then a lad
four or five years old. When the clouds rumbled and lightning flashed,
Shibu would say to me: \'There, uncle! They are striking matches
again!\' (all laugh) One day I noticed him chasing grasshoppers by
himself. The leaves rustled in the near-by trees. \'Hush! Hush!\' he
said to the leaves. \'I want to catch the grasshoppers.\' He was a child
and saw everything throbbing with consciousness. One cannot realize God
without the faith that knows no guile, the simple faith of a child.

\"Ah, what a state of mind I passed through! One day something bit me
while I was sitting in the grass. I was afraid it might have been a
snake, and I didn\'t know what to do. I had heard that if a snake bites
you again immediately after its first bite, it takes back. its own
venom. At once I set out to discover the hole so that I might let the
snake bite me again. While I was searching, a man said to me, \'What are
you doing?\' After listening to my story, he said, \'But the snake must
bite in the very same place it has bitten before.\' Thereupon I went
away. Perhaps I had been bitten by a scorpion or some other insect.

\"I had heard from Ramlal that the autumn chill was good for one\'s
health. Ramlal had quoted a verse to support it. One day, as I was
returning from Calcutta in a carriage, I stuck my head out of the window
so that I might get all the chill. Then I fell ill.\" (all laugh)

Sri Ramakrishna entered his room and sat down. His legs were a little
swollen. He asked the devotees to feel his legs and see whether or not
the pressure of their fingers made dimples. Dimples did appear with the
pressure, but the devotees said that it was nothing.

MASTER (to Bhavanath): \"Please ask Mahendra of Sinthi to see me. I
shall feel better if he reassures me.\"

BHAVANATH (with a smile): \"You have great faith in medicine. But we
haven\'t so much.\"

MASTER: \"It is God who, as the doctor, prescribes the medicine. It is
He who, in one form, has become the physician. Dr. Gangaprasad asked me
not to drink water at night. I regarded his statement as the words of
the Vedas. I look upon him as the physician of heaven.\"

Hazra entered the room and sat down. The Master talked awhile about
different things and then said to Hazra: \"You see, many people were at
Ram\'s house yesterday. Vijay, Kedār, and others were there. But why did
I feel so deeply stirred at the sight of Narendra? I found that Kedār
belonged to the realm of Divine Inebriation.\"

Presently Narendra arrived, and Sri Ramakrishna was exceedingly happy.
Narendra saluted the Master and began to talk with Bhavanath and others
in the room. M. was seated near by. A long mat was spread on the floor.
While talking, Narendra lay on it flat on his stomach. The Master looked
at him and suddenly went into samādhi. He sat on Narendra\'s back in an
ecstatic mood.

Bhavanath sang:

> *O Mother, ever blissful as Thou art,*
>
> *Do not deprive Thy worthless child of bliss! . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna came down from the plane of samādhi. He sang:

> *Repeat, O mind, my Mother Durga\'s hallowed name!*
>
> *O Gauri! O Narayani! to Thee I bow.*
>
> *Thou art the day, O Mother! Thou art the dusk and the night.*
>
> *As Rāma Thou drawest the bow, as Krishna Thou playest the flute;*
>
> *As Kāli all-terrible, Thou hast silenced Śiva, Thy Lord.*
>
> *The ten Embodiments of Divine Śakti art Thou,*
>
> *And Thou the ten Avatars; this time save me Thou must!*
>
> *With flowers and vilwa-leaves did Yaśoda worship Thee,*
>
> *And Thou didst bless her by placing Krishna, the Child, in her arms.*
>
> *Wherever I chance to live, O Mother, in forest or grove,*
>
> *May my mind, day and night, dwell at Thy Lotus Feet;*
>
> *Whether at last I die a natural or sudden death,*
>
> *Oh, may my tongue repeat Durga\'s name at the end!*
>
> *Thou mayest send me away, O Mother, but where shall I go?*
>
> *Tell me, Mother, where else shall I hear so sweet a name?*
>
> *Thou mayest even say to me: \"Step aside! Go away!\"*
>
> *Yet I shall cling to Thee, O Durga! Unto Thy feet*
>
> *As Thine anklets I shall cling, making their tinkling sound.*
>
> *When, O Mother, Thou sittest at mighty Śiva\'s side,*
>
> *Then I shall cry from Thy feet, \"Victory unto Śiva!\"*
>
> *Mother, when as the Kite, Thou soarest in the sky,*
>
> *There, in the water beneath, as a minnow I shall be swimming;*
>
> *Upon me Thou wilt pounce, and pierce me through with Thy claws.*
>
> *Thus, when the breath of life forsakes me in Thy grip,*
>
> *Do not deny me the shelter of Thy Lotus Feet!*
>
> *From the world\'s bondage free me, 0 Spouse of the Absolute!*
>
> *Thy two feet are my boat to cross this world\'s dark sea.*
>
> *Thou art the heavens and the earth, and Thou the nether world; From
> Thee have the twelve Gopalas and Hari and Brahma sprung. Whoever
> treads the path, repeating \"Durga! Durga!\" Śiva Himself protects
> with His almighty trident.*

Hazra was sitting on the northeast verandah counting the beads of his
rosary. The Master went and sat in front of him, taking the rosary in
his own hands.

MASTER (to Hazra): \"You see, I cannot use the rosary. No, perhaps I
can. Yes, I can with my left hand. But I cannot repeat the name of God
with it.\"

With these words Sri Ramakrishna tried to perform a little japa. But
hardly had he begun when he went into samādhi. He sat in that state a
long time, still holding the rosary in his hand. The devotees looked at
him with wonder in their eyes. Hazra also watched the Master without
uttering a word. After a long time Sri Ramakrishna regained
consciousness of the outer world and said that he was hungry. He often
said such things to bring his mind down to the normal plane. M. was
going to bring something for him to eat. The Master said, \"No, I shall
first go to the Kāli temple.\"

He went across the cement courtyard toward the Kāli temple. On the way
he bowed with folded hands to the twelve Śiva temples. On the left was
the temple of Radhakanta. He went there first and bowed before the
image. Then he entered the Kāli temple and saluted the Mother. Sitting
on a carpet, he offered flowers at the Mother\'s holy feet. He also
placed a flower on his own head. While returning from the temple he
asked Bhavanath to carry the green coconut offered at the temple, and
the charanamrita. Coming back to his room, accompanied by M. and
Bhavanath, he saluted Hazra, who cried out in dismay: \"What are you
doing, sir? What is this?\" The Master said, \"Why should you say it is
wrong?\" Hazra often argued with the Master, declaring that God dwelt in
all beings and that everybody could attain Brahmajnana through sadhana.
He had an exaggerated idea of his own spiritual progress.

It was about noon. The gong and the bells announced the worship and
offering in the various temples. The brahmins, the Vaishnavas, and the
beggars went to the guest-house to have their midday meal. The devotees

of the Master were also to partake of the sacred offerings. He asked
them to go to the guest-house. To Narendra he said: \"Won\'t you take
your meal in my room? All right. Narendra and I will eat here.\"
Bhavanath, Baburam, M., and the other devotees went to the guest-house.

After his meal Sri Ramakrishna rested a few minutes. The devotees were
on the verandah engaged in light conversation. He soon joined them and
was happy in their company. It was about two o\'clock. All were, still
sitting on the verandah, when suddenly Bhavanath appeared in the garb of
a brahmachari, dressed in an ochre cloth, kamandalu in hand, his face
beaming with smiles.

MASTER (with a smile): \"That is his inner feeling. Therefore he has
dressed himself as a brahmachari\"

NARENDRA: \"He has put on the garb of a brahmachari; let me put on the
garb of\' a Tantrik worshipper.\"

HAZRA: \"Then you will have to follow the Tantrik rituals, with women,
wine, and so on.\"

Sri Ramakrishna did not encourage the conversation. Indeed, he made fun
of it.

Suddenly the Master began to dance in an ecstatic mood. He sang:

> *Mother, Thou canst not trick me any more,*
>
> *For I have seen Thy crimson Lotus Feet. . . .*

The Master said: \"Ah, how wonderfully Rajnarayan sings about the Divine
Mother! He sings and dances that way. The music of Nakur Āchārya at
Kamarpukur is also wonderful. Ah, how beautiful his singing and dancing
are!\"

A sādhu was staying at the Panchavati. But he was a hot-tempered man; he
scolded and cursed everyone. He came to the Master\'s room wearing
wooden sandals and asked the Master, \"Can I get fire here?\" Sri
Ramakrishna saluted him and stood with folded hands as long as he
remained in the room.

When he had left, Bhavanath said to the Master with a laugh, \"What
great respect you showed the sādhu!\"

MASTER (smiling): \"You see, he too is Narayana, though full of tamas.
This is the way one should please people who have an excess of tamas.
Besides, he is a sādhu.\"

The devotees were engaged in a game of golokdham. Hazra joined them. The
Master stood by, watching them play. M. and Kishori reached \"heaven\".
Sri Ramakrishna bowed before them and said, \"Blessed are you two
brothers.\" He said to M., aside, \"Don\'t play any more.\" Hazra fell
into \"hell\". The Master said: \"What\'s the matter with Hazra?
Again!\" No sooner had Hazra got out of \"hell\" than he fell into it
again. All burst into laughter. Lātu, at the first throw of the dice,
went to \"heaven\" from \"earth\". He began to cut capers of joy. \"See
Lātu\'s joy!\" said the Master. \"He would have been terribly sad if he
hadn\'t achieved this. (Aside to the devotees) This too has a meaning.
Hazra is so vain that he thinks he will triumph over all even in this
game. This is the law of God, that He never humiliates a righteous
person. Such a man is victorious everywhere.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch in his room. Narendra,
Baburam, Bhavanath, and M. were sitting on the floor. Narendra referred
to various religious sects-the Ghoshpara, Panchanami, and others. Sri
Ramakrishna described their views and condemned their immoral practices.
He said that they could not follow the right course of spiritual
discipline, but enjoyed sensuous pleasures in the name of religion.

**Danger of Tantrik discipline**

MASTER (to Narendra): \"You need not listen to these things. The
bhairavas and the bhairavis of the Tantrik sect also follow this kind of
discipline. While in Benares I was taken to one of their mystic circles.
Each bhairava had a bhairavi with him. I was asked to drink the
consecrated wine, but I said I couldn\'t touch wine. They drank it. I
thought perhaps they would then practise meditation and japa. But
nothing of the sort. They

began to dance. I was afraid they might fall into the Ganges: the circle
had been made on its bank. It is very honourable for husband and wife to
assume the roles of bhairava and bhairavi.

(To Narendra and the others) \"Let me tell you this. I regard woman as
my mother; I regard myself as her son. This is a very pure attitude.
There is no danger in it. To look on woman as a sister is also not bad.
But to assume the attitude of a \'hero\', to look on woman as one\'s
mistress, is the most difficult discipline. Tārak\'s father followed
this discipline. It is very difficult. In this form of sadhana one
cannot always maintain the right attitude.

\"There are various paths to reach God. Each view is a path. It is like
reaching the Kāli temple by different roads. But it must be said that
some paths are clean and some dirty. It is good to travel on a clean
path.

\"Many views, many paths-and I have seen them all. But I don\'t enjoy
them any more; they all quarrel.

**Master\'s inner experiences**

\"No one else is here, and you are my own people. Let me tell you
something. I have come to the final realization that God is the Whole
and I am a part of Him, that God is the Master and I am His servant.
Furthermore, I think every now and then that He is I and I am He.\"

The devotees listened to these words in deep silence.

BHAVANATH (humbly): \"I feel disturbed if I have a misunderstanding with
someone. I feel that in that case I am not able to love all\"

MASTER: \"Try at the outset to talk to him and establish a friendly
relationship with him. If you fail in spite of your efforts, then don\'t
give it another thought. Take refuge in God. Meditate on Him. There is
no use in giving up God and feeling depressed from thinking about
others.\"

BHAVANATH: \"Great souls, such as Christ and Chaitanya, have admonished
us to love all beings.\"

MASTER: \"Love you must, because God dwells in all beings. But salute a
wicked person from a distance. You speak of Chaitanya? He also used to
restrain his spiritual feeling in the presence of unsympathetic people.
At Srivas\'s house he put Srivas\'s mother-in-law out of the room,
dragging her out by the hair.\"

BHAVANATH: \"It was not he but others who did it.\"

MASTER: \"Could the other have done it without his approval? What can be
done? Suppose a man cannot make another love him; must he worry about it
day and night? Must I waste my mind, which should be given to God, on
useless things? I say: \'O Mother, I don\'t want Narendra, Bhavanath,
Rākhāl , or anybody. I seek Thee alone. What shall I do with man?\'

When the Blissful Mother comes to my house, how much of the Chandi I
shall hear!

How many monks will come here, and how many yogis with matted locks!

\"When I attain God I shall attain everything. I renounced gold and
silver, saying, \'Rupee is clay and clay is rupee; gold is clay and clay
is gold.\' With these words I threw gold, silver, and clay into the
Ganges. Then I was afraid at the thought that Mother Lakshmi might be
angry with me because I had treated Her wealth with contempt; that She
might even stop my meals. So I prayed to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother,
I want Thee and nothing else.\' I knew that by realizing Her I should
get everything.\"

BHAVANATH (smiling): \"This is the shrewd calculation of a business
man.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, that is so. Once the Lord was pleased with a
certain devotee. He appeared before him

and said: \'I am very much pleased with your austerities. Ask a boon of
Me.\' The devotee said, \'O Lord, if You

are gracious enough to give me a boon, then please grant that I may eat
from gold plates with my grandchildren.\' One boon covered many
things-wealth, children, and grandchildren.\" (all laugh)

Hazra was sitting on the verandah.

MASTER: \"Do you know what Hazra wants? He wants money. His family is in
distress; he has debts. He thinks that God will give him money because
he devotes himself to japa and meditation.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Can\'t God fulfil a devotee\'s desire?\"

MASTER: \"If it is His sweet will. But God doesn\'t take entire
responsibility for a devotee unless the devotee is completely
intoxicated with ecstatic love for Him. At a feast it is only a child
whom one takes by the hand and seats at his place. Who does that with
older people? Not until a man thinks so much of God that he cannot look
after himself does God take on his responsibilities. Hazra doesn\'t
inquire about his family. His son said to Ramlal: \'Please ask father to
come home. We shall not ask anything of him.\' These words almost
brought tears to my eyes. Hazra\'s mother said to Ramlal: \'Please ask
Pratap to come home just once. Also ask your uncle to request him to
come home.\' I told him about it, but he didn\'t listen to me.

**Duty toward mother**

\"Is a mother to be trifled .with? Before becoming a sannyasi
Chaitanyadeva worked hard to persuade his mother to let him renounce
home. Mother Sachi said that she would kill Keshab Bharati.
Chaitanyadeva did his utmost to persuade her. He said: \'Mother, I shall
not renounce home if you won\'t let me. But if you compel me to lead a
householder\'s life, I shall die. And, mother, even if I go away as a
sannyasi, you will be able to see me whenever you desire. I shall stay
near you. I shall see you every now and then.\' Only when Chaitanya
explained it to her thus did she give her permission. Nārada could not
go to the forest to practise austerity as long as his mother was alive.
He had to take care of her. After her death he went away to realize God.

\"When I went to Vrindāvan I felt no desire to return to Calcutta. It
was arranged that I should live with Gangama. Everything was settled. My
bed was to be on one side and Gangama\'s on the other. I resolved not to
go back to Calcutta. I said to myself, \'How long must I eat a
kaivarta\'s food?\' \'No,\' said Hriday to me, \'let us go to
Calcutta.\' He pulled me by one hand and Gangama pulled me by the other.
I felt an intense desire to live at Vrindāvan. But just then I
remembered my mother. That completely changed everything. She was old. I
said to myself: \'My devotion to God will take to its wings if I have to
worry about my mother. I would rather live with her. Then I shall have
peace of mind and be able to meditate on God.\'

(To Narendra) \"Why don\'t you say a few words to Hazra about going
home? The other day he said to me, \'Yes, I shall go home and stay there
three days.\' But now he has forgotten all about it.

(To the devotees) \"We have talked about filthy things-Ghoshpara and
things like that. Govinda! Govinda! Govinda! Now chant the name of Hari.
Let there be a dish of rice pudding and sweets after the ordinary
lentils.\"

Narendra began to sing:

> *Fasten your mind, O man, on the Primal Purusha,*
>
> *Who is the Cause of all causes,*
>
> *The Stainless One, the Beginningless Truth.*
>
> *As Prana He pervades the infinite universe;*
>
> *The man of faith beholds Him,*
>
> *Living, resplendent, the Root of all.*
>
> *Beyond the senses, eternal, the Essence of Consciousness,*
>
> *He shines in the cave of the heart,*
>
> *Adorned with Holiness, Wisdom, and Love;*
>
> *By meditating on Him, man is delivered from grief.*
>
> *Of countenance ever serene,*
>
> *An inexhaustible Ocean of Virtue,*
>
> *None can fathom His depths; yet freely, of His own grace,*
>
> *Does He reveal Himself*
>
> *To those who come to His feet for shelter,*
>
> *Merciful since they are helpless and He is the Ever-forgiving, The
> Giver of happiness,*
>
> *The Ready Help in the sea of our woe.*
>
> *Unswervingly just, bestowing the fruits of our deeds, good and ill,*
>
> *Yet is He the Fount of Compassion,*
>
> *The Ocean of Mercy brimming with Love;*
>
> *Even to hear of His glory suffuses the eyes with tears.*
>
> *Gaze on His face and be blest:*
>
> *Your heart is hungry for Him, O man!*
>
> *Bright with unspeakable beauty, peerless and without stain,*
>
> *No words can ever describe Him;*
>
> *Be as a beggar before His gate*
>
> *And worship Him day and night, beseeching Him for His grace.*

He sang again:

> *In Wisdom\'s firmament the moon of Love is rising full,*
>
> *And Love\'s Hood-tide, in surging waves, is flowing everywhere.*
>
> *O Lord, how full of bliss Thou art! Victory unto Thee!*
>
> *On every side shine devotees, like stars around the moon;*
>
> *Their Friend, the Lord All-merciful, joyously plays with them.*
>
> *Behold! the gates of paradise today are open wide. . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna was dancing in a circle. The devotees joined him. They
all sang and danced. Their bliss was indescribable. The Master sang
about the Divine Mother:

> *Behold my Mother playing with Śiva, lost in an ecstasy of joy! . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna was highly pleased because M. had joined in the music.
He said to M., with a smile, \"The atmosphere would have been more
intense with divine fervour if a drum had accompanied the music and

played: *\'Tak tak ta dhina! Dak dak da dhina!\' \"*

It was dusk when the kirtan was finished.

**Wednesday, October 1, 1884**

**Master at Adhar\'s house**

Sri Ramakrishna had set out from Dakshineswar for Adhar\'s house in
Calcutta. Narayan and Gangadhar were with him. In the carriage, in an
ecstatic mood, he said: \"Shall I count the beads? How shameful that
would be! This emblem of Śiva has sprung from the bowels of the earth;
it is self created and not set up by man\'s hands.\"

They arrived at Adhar\'s house, where many devotees, including Kedār,
Baburam, and Vijay, had assembled. Vaishnavcharan, the musician, was
present. At the Master\'s behest, Adhar heard Vaishnavcharan\'s music
daily after his return from the office.

When the Master entered Adhar\'s drawing-room the devotees stood up to
receive him. Kedār and Vijay saluted him, and the Master asked Narayan
and Baburam to salute Kedār and Vijay. He asked Kedār and Vijay to bless
Narayan and Baburam that they might have devotion to God. Pointing to
Narayan he said, \"He is utterly guileless.\" The eyes of the devotees
were fixed on the two boys.

MASTER (to Kedār and the other devotees): \"It is good that I have met
you all here; otherwise perhaps you would have come to the Kāli temple
to see me. Through the will of God, however, we have met here.\"

KEDĀR (with folded hands): \"The will of God! It is all your will.\"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled. Vaishnavcharan began a kirtan about Radha and
Krishna. When the music was nearing its end, with the union of Radha and
Krishna, the Master began to dance with ecstatic fervour. The devotees
danced and sang around him. After the music they all sat down. The
Master said to Vijay, referring to Vaishnavcharan, \"He sings very
well.\" He asked the musician to sing the song about Sri Chaitanya,
beginning with the line, \"The beautiful Gaurānga, the youthful dancer,
fair as molten gold.\"

When the song was over, the Master asked Vijay, \"How did you like it?\"

VIJAY: \"Wonderful.\"

Sri Ramakrishna also sang a song about Sri Chaitanya, M. joining him.
Then Vaishnavcharan sang another song:

> *O my flute, sing Hari\'s name!*
>
> *You cannot know the highest Truth*
>
> *Without Lord Hari\'s grace.*
>
> *His name removes our bitter grief:*
>
> *Repeat the name of Hari, then,*
>
> *Repeat Sri Krishna\'s holy name!*
>
> *If He bestows His grace on me,*
>
> *No longer shall be afraid*
>
> *Of this unfriendly world;*
>
> *Sing then Lord Hari\'s name, my flute!*
>
> *Our only treasure is His name.*
>
> *Govinda says: Behold, my days*
>
> *Are passing by in vain:*
>
> *In the world\'s deep and shoreless sea,*
>
> *Oh, let me not be drowned!*

Vaishnavcharan sang again, this time about Mother Durga:

> *O tongue, always repeat the name of Mother Durga; Who but your Mother
> Durga will save you in distress? . . .*

The Master and the musician sang again and again the following lines
from the song:

> *The moving and the unmoving, the gross and the subtle, art Thou:*
>
> *Creation and preservation art Thou, and the last dissolution.*
>
> *Thou art the Primal Root of this manifold universe:*
>
> *The Mother of the three worlds, their only Saviour, art Thou; Thou
> art the Śakti of all, and Thou Thine own Śakti, too.*

Kedār and several devotees stood up. They were about to return home.
Kedār saluted the Master and bade him good-bye.

MASTER: \"Should you go away without bidding Adhar good-bye? Wouldn\'t
that be an act of discourtesy?\"

KEDĀR: \" \'When God is pleased, the world is pleased.\' You are
staying; so in a sense we are all staying. I am

not feeling well. Besides, I am a little nervous about my social
conventions. Once before I had trouble with our community.\"

VIJAY: (pointing to the Master): \"Should we go away and leave him
here?\"

Just then Adhar came in to take the Master to the dining-room, for the
meal was ready. Sri Ramakrishna stood up and said, addressing Kedār and
Vijay: \"Come. Come with me.\" They followed him and partook of the
dinner together with the other devotees.

After dinner they all returned to the drawing-room, where the devotees
sat around the Master. Kedār said to him with folded hands, \'Please
forgive me for hesitating to eat here.\' Perhaps the thought had come to
his mind that he should not have hesitated, since the Master himself had
no scruples about eating at Adhar\'s house.

Kedār worked at Dāccā. Many devotees brought offerings of sweets and
other food for him. Referring to this, Kedār said to the Master:
\"People want to give me food. What should I do? Lord, what is your
command in this matter?\"

MASTER: \"One can eat food even from an untouchable if the untouchable
is a devotee of God. After spending seven years in a God-intoxicated
state at Dakshineswar, I visited Kamarpukur. Oh, what a state of mind I
was in at that time! Even a prostitute fed me with her own hands. But I
cannot allow that now.\"

Kedār was about to take his leave.

KEDĀR (in a low voice): \"Lord, please transmit power to me. Many people
come to me. What do I know?\"

MASTER: \"Everything will be all right. One gets along well if one is
sincerely devoted to God.\"

Yogendra, the editor of a Bengali paper, the Bangavasi, entered the
room. The conversation turned to the Personal God and God without form.

MASTER: \"God has form; again, He is formless. How many aspects He has!
We cannot comprehend Him. Why should we say that God is formless only?\"

YOGENDRA: \"That is the one amazing thing about the Brahmo Samaj. There
even a boy twelve years old sees God as formless. The members of the Adi
Samaj do not object very much to God with form. They are allowed to
attend ritualistic worship if it takes place in respectable families.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"How nicely he has put it! Even a boy sees the
formless God!\"

ADHAR: \"Shivanath Babu does not believe in God\'s forms.\"

VIJAY: \"That is his mistake. (Pointing to the Master) As he says, the
chameleon assumes different colours-now this colour, now that. Only the
man who lives under the tree knows the animal\'s true colour.

\"While meditating I saw images of gods painted on a canvas. How many
gods! How many different things they said! I said to myself: \'I shall
go to the Master. He will explain it all to me.\' \"

MASTER: \"You saw correctly.\"

KEDĀR: \"God assumes forms for the sake of His devotees. Through
ecstatic love a devotee sees God with form. Dhruva had a vision of the
Lord. He said: \'Why don\'t your ear-rings move?\' The Lord said, \'They
will move if you move them.\' \"

MASTER: \"One must accept everything: God with form and God without
form. While meditating in the Kāli

temple I noticed Ramani, a prostitute. I said, \'Mother, I see that Thou
art in that form too.\' Therefore I say one must accept everything. One
does not know when or how God will reveal Himself.\"

The Master sang:

> *A mendicant has come to us, ever absorbed in divine moods. . .*

VIJAY: \"God has infinite power. Can He not reveal Himself in any form
He chooses? Man is a speck of dust, and he dares come to a conclusion
about God. How amazing!\"

MASTER: \"A man reads a little of the Gitā, the Bhagavata, or the
Vedānta and thinks he has understood everything. Once an ant went to a
hill of sugar. One grain of sugar filled its stomach, and it was
returning home with another grain in its mouth. On the way it said to
itself, \'The next time I go, I shall bring home the whole hill.\' \"
(All laugh)

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 30**