*Unmana Samādhi*:

**Sannyāsi\'s discipline**

\"The sannyāsi\'s way of living is like observing the ekadasi fast
without taking even a drop of water. If he clings to enjoyment, then he
has reason to be afraid. \'Woman and gold\' is enjoyment. If a monk
enjoys it, he is swallowing his own spittle, as it were. There are
different kinds of enjoyment: money, wealth, name, fame, and sense
pleasures. It is not good for a sannyāsi to sit in the company of a
woman devotee, or even to talk to her. This injures him and others as
well. Then others cannot learn from him; he cannot set an example to
humanity. A sannyāsi keeps his body in order to teach mankind.

\"To sit with a woman or talk to her a long time has also been described
as a kind of sexual intercourse. There are eight kinds. To listen to a
woman and enjoy her conversation is one kind; to speak about a woman is
another kind; to whisper to her privately is a third kind; to keep
something belonging to a woman and enjoy it is a fourth kind; to touch
her is a fifth. Therefore a sannyāsi should not salute his guru\'s young
wife, touching her feet. These are the rules for sannyāsis.

**Householders discipline**

\"But the case is quite different with householders. After the birth of
one or two children, the husband and wife should live as brother and
sister. The other seven kinds of sexual intercourse do not injure them
much.

\"A householder has various debts: debts to the gods, to the fathers,
and to the rishis. He also owes a debt to his wife. He should make her
the mother of one or two children and support her if she is a chaste
woman.

\"Householders do not know who is a good wife and who is a bad wife, who
is a vidyaŚakti and who is an avidyaŚakti. A vidyaŚakti, a good wife,
has very little lust and anger. She sleeps little. She pushes her
husband\'s head away from her. She is full of affection, kindness,
devotion, modesty, and other noble qualities. Such a wife serves all,
looking on all men as her children. Further, she helps increase her
husband\'s love of God. She doesn\'t spend much money lest her husband
should have to work hard and thus not get leisure to think of God.

\"Mannish women have different traits. These are bad traits: squint eyes
and hollow eyes, catlike eyes, lantern jaws like a calf\'s, and
pigeon-breast.\"

GIRISH: \"What is the way for people like us?\"

**Different aspects of bhakti**

MASTER: \"Bhakti is the only essential thing. Bhakti has different
aspects: the sattvic, the rajasic, and the tamasic. One who has sattvic
bhakti is very modest and humble. But a man with tamasic bhakti is like
a highwayman in his attitude toward God. He says: \'O God, I am
chanting. Your name; how can I be a sinner? O God, You are my own
Mother; You must reveal your-self to me.\' \"

GIRISH (smiling): \"It is you, sir, who teach us tamasic bhakti.\"

**Different kinds of samādhi**

MASTER (smiling): \"There are certain signs of God-vision. When a man
sees God he goes into samādhi. There are five kinds of samādhi. First,
he feels the *Mahāvāyu* rise like an ant crawling up. Second, he feels
It rise like a fish swimming in the water. Third, he feels It rise like
a snake wriggling along. Fourth, he feels It rise like a bird
flying-flying from one branch to another. Fifth, he feels It rise like a
monkey making a big jump; the *Mahāvāyu* reaches the head with one jump,
as it were, and samādhi follows.

\"There are two other kinds of samādhi. First, the sthita samādhi, when
the aspirant totally loses outer

consciousness: he remains in that state a long time, it may be for many
days. Second, the it is to withdraw the mind suddenly from all
sense-objects and unite it with God.

(To M.) \"Do you understand this?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

GIRISH: \"Can one realize God by *sādhanā*?\"

MASTER: \"People have realized God in various ways. Some through much
austerity, worship, and devotion; they have attained perfection through
their own efforts. Some are born perfect, as for example Nārada and
Sukadeva; they are called nityasiddha, eternally perfect. There are also
those who have attained perfection all of a sudden; it is like a man\'s
unexpectedly coming into a great fortune. Again, there are instances of
people\'s realizing God in a dream and by divine grace.\"

Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna sang, intoxicated with divine fervour:

> *Can everyone have the vision of Syama? Is Kāli\'s treasure for
> everyone?*
>
> *Oh, what a pity my foolish mind will not see what is true! . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna remained in ecstasy a few moments. Girish and the other
devotees were seated before him. A few days earlier Girish had been very
rude to the Master at the Star Theatre; but now he was in a calm state
of mind.

MASTER (to Girish): \"This mood of yours is very good; it is peaceful. I
prayed about you to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother, make him peaceful so
that he won\'t abuse me.\' \"

GIRISH (to M.): \"I feel as if someone were pressing my tongue. I can\'t
talk.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was still in an indrawn mood; he seemed to be gradually
forgetting the men and the objects around him. He tried to bring his
mind down to the relative world. He looked at the devotees.

Looking at M., he said: \"They all come to Dakshineswar. Let them.
Mother knows everything.\" To a young man

of the neighbourhood he said: \"Hello! What do you think? What is the
duty of man?\" All sat in silence. To Narayan he said: \"Don\'t you want
to pass the examinations? But, my dear child, a man freed from bondage
is Śiva; entangled in bondage, he is jiva.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was still in the God-intoxicated mood. There was a glass
of water near him. He drank the water. He said to himself, \"Why, I have
drunk water in this mood!\"

It was not yet dusk. Sri Ramakrishna was talking to Atul, who was seated
in front of him. Atul was Girish\'s brother and a lawyer of the High
Court of Calcutta. A brahmin neighbour was also seated near him.

MASTER (to Atul): \"All I want to tell you is this. Follow both; perform
your duties in the world and also cultivate love of God.\"

BRAHMIN: \"Can anyone but a brahmin achieve perfection?\"

MASTER: \"Why should you ask that? It is said that in the Kaliyuga the
sudras achieve love of God. There are the instances of Savari, Ruhidas,
the untouchable Guhaka, and others.\"

NARAYAN (smiling): \"Brahmins and sudras-all are one.\"

BRAHMIN: \"Can a man realize God in one birth?\"

MASTER: \"Is anything impossible for the grace of God? Suppose you bring
a light into a room that has been dark a thousand years; does it remove
the darkness little by little? The room is lighted all at once. (To
Atul) Intense renunciation is what is needed. One should be like an
unsheathed sword. When a man has that

renunciation, he looks on his relatives as black cobras and his home as
a deep well.

\"One should pray to God with sincere longing. God cannot but listen to
prayer if it is sincere.\"

All sat in silence, pondering Sri Ramakrishna\'s words.

MASTER (to Atul): \"What is worrying you? Is it that you haven\'t that
grit, that intense restlessness for God?\"

**How to cultivate longing for God**

ATUL: \"How can we keep our minds on God?\"

MASTER: *\"Abhyāsa Yoga,* the yoga of practice. You should practise
calling on God every day. It is not possible to succeed in one day;
through daily prayer you will come to long for God.

\"How can you feel that restlessness if you are immersed in worldliness
day and night? Formerly Jadu Mallick enjoyed spiritual talk; he liked to
engage in it himself. But nowadays he doesn\'t show that much interest.
He surrounds himself with flatterers day and night and indulges in
worldly talk.\"

It was dusk. The lamp was lighted in the room. Sri Ramakrishna chanted
the divine names. He was singing and praying. He said, \"Chant the name
of Hari, repeat the name of Hari, sing the name of Hari.\" Again he
said, \"Rāma! Rāma! Rāma!\" Then: \"O Mother! Thou dost ever enjoy Thine
eternal Sports. Tell us, O Mother, what is the way? We have taken refuge
in Thee; we have taken shelter at Thy feet.\"

Finding Girish restless, Sri Ramakrishna remained silent a moment. He
asked Tejchandra to sit near him. The boy sat near the Master. He
whispered to M. that he would have to leave soon.

MASTER (to M.): \"What did he say?\"

M: \"He said he would have to go home.\"

MASTER: \"Why do I attract these boys to me so much? They are
purevessels untouched by worldliness. A man cannot assimilate
instruction if his mind is stained with worldliness. Milk can be safely
kept in a new pot; but it turns sour if kept in a pot in which curd has
been made. You may wash a thousand times a cup that has held a solution
of garlic, but still you cannot remove the smell.\"

**Master at the theatre**

Sri Ramakrishna arrived at the Star Theatre, on Beadon Street, to see a
performance of Vrishaketu He sat in a box, facing the south. M. and
other devotees were near him.

MASTER (to M.): \"Has Narendra come?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

The performance began. Karna and his wife Padmavati sacrificed their son
to please God, who had come to them in the guise of a brahmin to test
Karna\'s charity. During this scene one of the devotees gave a
suppressed sigh. Sri Ramakrishna also expressed his sorrow.

After the play Sri Ramakrishna went to the recreation room of the
theatre. Girish and Narendra were already there. The Master stood near
Narendra and said, \"I have come.\"

Sri Ramakrishna took a seat. The orchestra was playing in the
auditorium.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"I feel happy listening to the concert. The
musicians used to play on the sanai at Dakshineswar and I would go into
ecstasy. Noticing this, a certain sādhu said, \'This is a sign of the
Knowledge of Brahman.\'\"

The orchestra stopped playing and Sri Ramakrishna began the
conversation.

MASTER (to Girish): \"Does this theatre belong to you?\"

GIRISH: \"It is ours, sir.\"

MASTER: \" \'Ours\' is good; it is not good to say \'mine\'. People say
\'I\' and \'mine\'; they are egotistic, small-minded people.\"

NARENDRA: \"The whole world is a theatre.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, yes, that\'s right. In some places you see the play of
vidyā and in some, the play of avidyā.\"

NARENDRA: \"Everything is the play of vidyā.\"

MASTER: \"True, true. But a man realizes that when he has the Knowledge
of Brahman; But for a bhakta, who follows the path of divine love, both
exist-Vidyā-māyā and Avidyā-māyā.

\"Please sing a little.\"

Narendra sang:

> *Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness waves of ecstatic love arise:*
>
> *Rapture divine! Play of God\'s Bliss!*
>
> *Oh, how enthralling!*
>
> *Wondrous waves of the sweetness of God, ever new and ever
> enchanting,*
>
> *Rise on the surface, ever assuming*
>
> *Forms ever fresh.*
>
> *Then once more in the Great Communion all are merged, as the barrier
> walls*
>
> *Of time and space dissolve and vanish:*
>
> *Dance then, O mind!*
>
> *Dance in delight with hands upraised, chanting Lord Hari\'s holy
> name.*

As Narendra sang the words, *\"Then once more in the Great Communion all
are merged\",* Sri Ramakrishna said

to him, \"One realizes this after attaining the Knowledge of Brahman;
then all is vidyā, Brahman, as you said.\"

> As Narendra sang the line, *\"Dance in delight with hands upraised,
> chanting Lord Hari\'s holy name\",* the Master

said to him, \"Sing that line twice.\"

After the song Sri Ramakrishna resumed the conversation.

GIRISH: \"Devendra Babu hasn\'t come. He says in a mood of wounded
pride: \'We haven\'t any stuff inside us, no filling of thickened milk.
We are filled only with worthless lentil-paste. Why should we go
there?\"

MASTER (surprised): \"Does he say that? He never said so before.\"

Sri Ramakrishna took some refreshments and handed some to Narendra.

JATIN DEVA (to the Master): \"You always say: \'Narendra, eat this! Eat
that!\' Are the rest of us fools? Are we like straw washed ashore by the
flood-tide?\"

Sri Ramakrishna loved Jatin dearly. Jatin visited the Master now and
then at Dakshineswar and occasionally spent the night there. He belonged
to an aristocratic family of Sobhabazar. The Master said laughingly to
Narendra, \"He is talking about you.\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughed and showed his affection to Jatin by touching
his chin. He said to Jatin, \"Come to Dakshineswar; I\'ll give you
plenty to eat.\"

The Master went into the auditorium to see a farce. He sat in a box. He
laughed at the conversation of the maidservant. After a while he became
absent-minded and whispered a few words to M.

MASTER (to M.): \"Well, is what Girish Ghosh says true?\"

Girish had lately been speaking of Sri Ramakrishna as an Incarnation of
God.

M: \"Yes, sir, it must be true. Otherwise why should it appeal to our
minds?\"

MASTER: \"You see, a change is coming over me. The old mood has changed.
I am not able to touch any metal now.\"

M. listened to these words in wonder.

MASTER: \"There is a very deep meaning in this new mood.\" Was the
Master hinting that a God-man cannot bear any association with worldly
treasure?

MASTER (to M.): \"Well, do you notice any change in me?\"

1.  \"In what respect, sir?\" MASTER: \"In my activities.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Your activities are increasing as more people come to know about
    you.\" MASTER: \"Do you see? What I said before is now coming
    true.\"

After a few moments he said, \"Can you tell me why Paltu can\'t meditate
well?\"

Sri Ramakrishna was ready to leave for Dakshineswar. He had remarked to
a devotee about Girish, \"You may wash a thousand times a cup that has
held a solution of garlic; but is it ever possible to get rid of the
smell altogether?\" Girish was offended by this remark. When the Master
was about to leave, Girish spoke.

GIRISH: \"Will this smell of garlic go?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, it will.\"

GIRISH: \"So you say it will.\"

MASTER: \"All smell disappears when a blazing fire is lighted. If you
heat the cup smelling of garlic, you get rid of the smell; it becomes a
new cup.

\"The man who says he will not succeed will never succeed. He who feels
he is liberated is indeed liberated; and he who feels he is bound verily
remains bound. He who forcefully says, \'I am free\' is certainly free;
and he who says day and night, \'I am bound\' is certainly bound.\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 37**

THE MASTER AND NARENDRA

> Sunday, March 1, 1885

SRl RAMAKRISHNA was seated on the small couch in his room, absorbed in
deep samādhi. Mahimacharan,

Ram, Manomohan, Nabai Chaitanya, M., and other devotees were sitting on
a mat spread on the floor. They

were watching the Master intently.

It was the day of the Dolayatra, a Hindu religious festival. Sri Krishna
and Radha are the central figures of this celebration, their images
being placed on a swing, which is rocked now and then. A red powder is
showered on the images. Later, friends and relatives throw the powder at
one another. This festival is celebrated when winter passes into spring,
on a full-moon day rendered doubly sacred by its association with the
birth of Sri Chaitanya.

The devotees saw that the Master was returning to consciousness of the
world, though his mind still lingered in the realm of God-vision.

The Master said to Mahimacharan, \"My dear sir, please tell us something
about love of God.\"

> *What need is there of penance if God is worshipped with love?*
>
> *What is the use of penance if God is not worshipped with love?*
>
> *What need is there of penance if God is seen within and without?*
>
> *What is the use of penance if God is not seen within and without?*
>
> *O Brahman! O my child! Cease from practising further penances.*
>
> *Hasten to Sankara, the Ocean of Heavenly Wisdom;*
>
> *Obtain from Him the love of God, the pure love praised by devotees,
> which snaps in twain the shackles that bind you to the world.*

Mahima said, \"Once while the great sage Nārada was practising
austerity, he suddenly heard a heavenly voice repeating those lines.\"

**Two kinds of devotion**

MASTER; \"There are two classes of devotees: jivakotis, or ordinary men,
and Isvarakotis, or Divine Messengers. The jivakoti\'s devotion to God
is called vaidhi, formal; that is, it conforms to scriptural laws. He
worships God with a fixed number of articles, repeats God\'s holy name a
specified number of times, and so on and so forth. This kind of
devotion, like the path of knowledge, leads to the Knowledge of God and
to samādhi. The jivakoti does not return from samādhi to the relative
plane.

\"But the case of the Isvarakoti is different. He follows the process of
\'negation\' and \'affirmation\'. First he negates the world, realizing
that it is not Brahman; but then he affirms the same world, seeing it as
the manifestation of Brahman. To give an illustration: a man wanting to
climb to the roof first negates the stairs as not being the roof, but on
reaching the roof he finds that the stairs are made of the same
materials as the roof: brick, lime, and brick-dust. Then he can either
move up and down the stairs or remain on the roof, as he pleases.

**Vision of God**

\"Sukadeva was absorbed in samādhi-nirvikalpa samādhi, jada samādhi.
Since Suka was to recite the Bhagavata to King Parikshit, the Lord sent
the sage Nārada to him. Nārada saw him seated like an inert thing,
absolutely unconscious of the world around him. Thereupon Nārada sang
four couplets on the beauty of Hari, to the accompaniment of the vina.
While the first couplet was being sung the hair on Suka\'s body stood on
end. Next he shed tears; for he saw the form of God, the Embodiment of
Spirit, within himself, in his heart. Thus Sukadeva saw the form of God
even after jada samādhi. He was an Isvarakoti.

**How a liberated soul lives in the world**

\"Hanuman, after having the vision of God both with form and without,
remained firmly devoted to the form of Rāma, the Embodiment of
Consciousness and Bliss.

\"Prahlada sometimes realized, \'I am He\'; sometimes he felt that he
was the servant of God. How can such a person live without love of God?
That is why he must accept the relationship of master and servant,
feeling that God is the Master and himself the servant. This enables him
to enjoy the Bliss of Hari. In this attitude he feels that God is the
Bliss and he himself is the enjoyer.

\"The \'ego of Devotion\', the \'ego of Knowledge\', and the \'ego of a
child\' do not harm the devotee.

Sankaracharya kept the ego of Knowledge\'.

**Detachment of a child**

The \'ego of a child\' is not attached to anything. The child is beyond
the three *Gunās*; he is not under the control of any of them. One
moment you find him angry; the next moment it is all over. One moment
you see him building his play house; the next moment he forgets all
about it. Now you see him love his playmates; but if they are out of his
sight a few days he forgets all about them. A child is not under the
control of any of the *Gunās*-sattva, rajas, or tamas.

**\"I-consciousness\"after God-realization**

\"The bhakta feels, \'O God, Thou art the Lord and I am Thy devotee.\'
This \'I\' is the \'ego of bhakti\'. Why does such a lover of God retain
the \'ego of Devotion\'? There is a reason. The ego cannot begot rid of;
so let the rascal remain as the servant of God, the devotee of God.

\"You may reason a thousand times, but you cannot get rid of the ego.
The ego is like a pitcher, and Brahman like the ocean-an infinite
expanse of water on all sides. The pitcher is set in this ocean. The
water is both inside and out; the water is everywhere; yet the pitcher
remains. Now, this pitcher is the \'ego of the devotee\'. As long as the
ego remains, \'you\' and \'I\' remain, and there also remains the
feeling, \'O God, Thou art the Lord and I am Thy devotee; Thou art the
Master and I am Thy servant.\' You may reason a million times, but you
cannot get rid of it. But it is different if there is no pitcher.\"

Narendra entered the room and saluted the Master. They began to talk
together. Presently the Master came down from the couch and sat on the
floor, on which a mat had been spread. In the mean time the room had
become filled with people, both devotees and visitors.

**Master warns Narendra about householders**

MASTER (to Narendra): \"Are you well? I hear that you often visit Girish
Ghosh at his house. Is it true?\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes, sir, I go there now and then.\"

Girish had been visiting Sri Ramakrishna for some months. The Master
said that none could fathom the depth of Girish\'s faith. And his
longing for God was as intense as his faith was deep. At home, he was
always absorbed in the thought of Sri Ramakrishna. Many of the Master\'s
devotees visited him; they talked only about Sri Ramakrishna. But Girish
was a householder who had had varied experiences of worldly life, and
the Master knew that Narendra would renounce the world, that he would
shun \"woman and gold\" both mentally and outwardly.

MASTER: \"Do you visit Girish frequently? No matter how much one washes
a cup that has contained a solution of garlic, still a trace of the
smell will certainly linger. The youngsters who come here are pure
souls-untouched by \'woman and gold\'. Men who have associated a long
time with \'woman and gold\' smell of the garlic, as it were. They are
like a mango pecked by crows. Such a fruit cannot be offered to the
Deity in the temple, and you would hesitate to eat it yourself. Again,
take the case of a new pot and another in which curd has been

made. One is afraid to keep milk in the second pot, for the milk very
often turns sour.

\"Householder devotees like Girish form a class by themselves. They
desire yoga and also bhoga. Their attitude is that of Ravana, who wanted
to enjoy the maidens of heaven and at the same time realize Rāma. They
are like the asuras, the demons, who enjoy various pleasures and also
realize Narayana.\"

NARENDRA: \"But Girish has given up his old associates.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, yes. He is like a bull castrated in old age. In Burdwan I
once saw an ox moving about the cows. I asked a bullock-cart driver:
\'what is this? an ox? How strange!\' He said to me: \'True, sir. But it
was castrated in old age, and so it hasn\'t altogether shaken off the
old tendencies.\'

\"In a certain place there sat some sannyāsis. A young woman happened to
pass by. All continued as before to meditate on God, except one of them,
who cast sidelong glances at her. Before becoming a monk he had been the
father of three children.

\"If you make a solution of garlic in a cup, won\'t it be hard to remove
the smell from it? Can a worthless tree like the babui produce mangoes?
Of course such a thing may become possible through the occult powers of
a yogi; but can everyone acquire such powers?

**Worldly people have no time for spiritual practice**

\"When have worldly people time to think of God? A man wanted to engage
a pundit who could explain the Bhagavata to him. His friend said: \'I
know of an excellent pundit. But there is one difficulty: he does a
great deal of farming. He has four ploughs and eight bullocks and is
always busy with them; he has no leisure.\' Thereupon the man said: \'I
don\'t care for a pundit who has no leisure. I am not looking for a
Bhagavata scholar burdened with ploughs and bullocks. I want a pundit
who can really expound the sacred book to me.\'

\"There was a king who used to listen daily to a pundit\'s exposition of
the Bhagavata. Every day at the end of their study the pundit would ask
the king, \'O King, have you understood what I have read?\' To this
question the king would daily give the same reply: \'Sir, you had better
understand it first yourself.\' Each day, when the pundit returned home,
he would ponder the meaning of the king\'s words. He was a pious man,
devoted to prayer and meditation. Gradually he came to his senses and
realized that the only real thing in the world is the Lotus Feet of God,
and that all else is illusory. He felt dispassion for the world and took
up the life of a monk. As he was leaving the world he sent a man to the
king with the message: \'Yes, O King! Now I have understood.\'

\"But do I look down on worldly people? Of course not. When I see them,
I apply the Knowledge of Brahman, the Oneness of Existence. Brahman
itself has become everything; all are Narayana Himself. Regarding all
women as so many forms of the Divine Mother, I see no difference between
a chaste woman and a streetwalker.

\"Alas! I find no customers who want anything better than kalai pulse.
No one wants to give up \'woman and gold\'. Man, deluded by the beauty
of woman and the power of money, forgets God. But to one who has seen
the beauty of God, even the position of Brahma, the Creator, seems
insignificant.

\"A man said to Ravana, \'You have been going to Sita in different
disguises; why don\'t you go to her in the form of Rāma?\' \'But\',
Ravana replied \'when I meditate on Rāma in my heart, the most beautiful
women-celestial maidens like Rambha and Tilottama-appear no better than
ashes of the funeral pyre. Then even the position of Brahma appears
trivial to me, not to speak of the beauty of another man\'s wife.\'

\"Alas! I find that all the customers here seek worthless *Kalai* Pulse.
Unless, the soul is pure, it cannot have genuine love of God and
single-minded devotion to the ideal. The mind wanders away to various
objects.

(To Manomohan ) \"You may take offence at my words; but I said to Rākhāl
, \'I would rather hear that you had

drowned yourself in the Ganges than learn that you had accepted a job
under another person and become his servant.\'

\"One day a Nepalese girl came here. She sang devotional songs to the
accompaniment of the esraj. When someone asked her if she was married,
she said sharply: \'What? I am the handmaid of God! Whom else could I
serve?\'

\"How can a man living in the midst of \'woman and gold\' realize God?
It is very hard for him to lead an unattached life. First, he is the
slave of his wife, second, of money, and third, of the master whom he
serves.

**Akbar and the holy man**

\"When Akbar was Emperor of Delhi there lived a hermit in a hut in the
forest. Many people visited the holy man. At one time he felt a great
desire to entertain his visitors. But how could he do so without money?
So he decided to go to the Emperor for help, for the gate of Akbar\'s
palace was always open to holy men. The hermit entered the palace while
the Emperor was at his daily devotions and took a seat in a corner of
the room. He heard the Emperor conclude his worship with the prayer, \'O
God, give me money; give me riches\', and so on and so forth. When the
hermit heard this he was about to leave the prayer hall; but the Emperor
signed to him to wait. When the prayer was over, Akbar said to him,
\'You came to see me; how is it that you were about to leave without
saying anything to me?\' \'Your Majesty need not trouble yourself about
it\', answered the hermit. \'I must leave now.\' When the Emperor
insisted, the hermit said, \'Many people visit my hut, and so I came
here to ask you for some money.\' \'Then\', said Akbar, \'why were you
going away without speaking to me?\' The hermit replied: \'I found that
you too were a beggar; you too prayed to God for money and riches.
Thereupon I said to myself, \"Why should I beg of a beggar? If I must
beg, let me beg of God.\" \' \"

NARENDRA: \"Nowadays Girish Ghosh thinks of nothing but spiritual
things.\"

MASTER: \"That is very good. But why is he so abusive? Why does he use
such vulgar language to me? In my present state of mind I cannot bear
such rudeness. When a thunderbolt strikes near a house, the heavy things
inside the house are not much affected; but the window-panes rattle.
Nowadays I cannot bear such roughness. A man living on the plane of
sattva cannot bear noise and uproar. That is why Hriday was sent away.
It was the Divine Mother who sent him away. During the later part of his
stay he went to extremes; he became very rough and abusive. (To
Narendra) Do you agree with Girish about me?\"

NARENDRA: \"He said he believed you to be an Incarnation of God. I
didn\'t say anything in answer to his remarks.\"

MASTER: \"But how great his faith is! Don\'t you think so?\"

The devotees listened intently to the Master\'s words. He was still
seated on the mat spread on the floor, with M. by his side and Narendra
in front of him. The devotees were sitting around.

After a few minutes silence he said to Narendra tenderly, \"My child,
you will not attain God without renouncing \'woman and gold\'.\" As he
said this, great emotion welled up in his heart. Fixing on Narendra an
earnest and tender look, he sang:

> *We are afraid to speak, and yet we are afraid to keep still;*
>
> *Our minds, O Radha, half believe that we are about to lose you!*
>
> *We tell you the secret that we know-*
>
> *The secret whereby we ourselves, and others, with our help,*
>
> *Have passed through many a time of peril;*
>
> *Now it all depends on you.*

Sri Ramakrishna seemed to be afraid lest Narendra should leave him.
Narendra looked at the Master with tears in his eyes.

A visitor who was there for the first time heard and saw all this. He
said to the Master, \"Sir, if one must renounce \'woman and gold\', then
what shall a householder do?\"

MASTER: \"You may enjoy \'woman and gold\'. What has passed between us
is no concern of yours.\" Mahimacharan, a householder devotee, heard
everything and sat speechless.

MASTER (to Mahima): \"Go forward. Push on. You will discover the forest
of sandal-wood. Go farther and you will find the silver-mine. Go farther
still and you will see the gold-mine. Do not stop there. Go forward, and
you will reach the mines of rubies and diamonds. Therefore I say, go
forward.\"

MAHIMA: \"But, sir, something holds us back. We can\'t move.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Why? Cut the reins. Cut them with the sword of
God\'s name. \'The shackles of *Kala,* Time, are cut by Kāli\'s name.\'

\"Every now and then, the Master cast his gracious look on Narendra. He
said, \"Have you now become an experienced physician?\" Quoting a
Sanskrit verse he said, \"He who has killed only a hundred patients is a
novice in medicine; but he becomes an expert after killing a thousand!\"

Was the Master hinting that Narendra, even though still young, had had
many painful experiences of life? Narendra smiled and kept silent.

It was afternoon. The devotees were seated around the Master, listening
to Nabai Chaitanya\'s singing.

Suddenly the Master left the room, but the music continued. M.
accompanied the Master. Sri Ramakrishna walked across the courtyard and
entered the temple of Radhakanta. He bowed down before the images, M.
following him. There was some red powder in a tray. The Master offered a
little powder to the images and bowed down again. Next he proceeded to
the Kāli temple. Passing up the seven steps, he stood on the open porch
and looked at the image. Then he entered the shrine, offered red powder
to the Divine Mother, and saluted Her. As he left the temple he asked
M., \"Why didn\'t you Bring Baburam with you?\"

Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room accompanied by M. and another
devotee carrying the tray of red powder. He offered a little of it to
all the pictures of gods and goddesses in his room, but not to those of
Jesus Christ and himself. Then he threw the powder on the bodies of
Narendra and the other devotees. They all took the dust of his feet.

In the cool shade of the late afternoon the devotees walked about in the
temple garden, leaving the Master and M. in the room. The Master
whispered to M.: \"All say that they meditate well. But why is it
different with Paltu? What do you think of Narendra? He is utterly
guileless. Just now he is faced with many difficult family problems and
so his spiritual progress is a little checked; but it will not be so for
long.\"

Narendra was arguing on the verandah with a Vedantist. Now and then the
Master went out to look at them. As the devotees gathered in the room he
asked Mahima to recite a hymn. Mahima chanted a verse from the
Mahanirvana Tantra:

> *We worship the Brahman- Consciousness in the Lotus of the Heart, The
> Undifferentiated, who is adored by Hari, Hara, and Brahma. . . .*

Mahima recited a few more hymns and at last one to Śiva, by
Sankaracharya, that compared the world to a deep well and a wilderness.
Mahima was a householder.

The hymn ran thus:

> *O Great God! O Thou Auspicious One, with the moon shining in Thy
> crest!*
>
> *Slayer of Madana! Wielder of the trident! Unmoving One! Lord of the
> Himalayas!*
>
> *O Consort of Durga, Lord of all creatures! Thou who scatterest the
> distress of the fearful!*
>
> *Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
> miserable world.*
>
> *O Beloved of Parvati\'s heart! O Thou moon-crested Deity!*
>
> *Master of every being! Lord of hosts! O Thou, the Lord of Parvati!*
>
> *O Vamadeva, Self-existent One! O Rudra, Wielder of the bow!*
>
> *Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
> miserable world.*
>
> *O blue-throated God! Śiva, whose ensign is the bull! O Five-faced
> One!*
>
> *Lord of the worlds, who wearest snakes upon Thy wrists! O Thou
> Auspicious One!*
>
> *O Śiva! O Pasupati! O Thou, the Lord of Parvati!*
>
> *Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest Of this
> miserable world.*
>
> *O Lord of the Universe! O Śiva Sankara! OGod of Gods!*
>
> *Thou who dost bear the river Ganges in Thy matted locks!*
>
> *Thou, the Master of Pramatha and Nandika! O Hara, Lord of the world!*
>
> *Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
> miserable world.*
>
> *O King of Kasi, Lord of the cremation ground of Manikarnika!*
>
> *O mighty Hero, Thou the Destroyer of Daksha\'s sacrifice! O
> All-pervasive One!*
>
> *O Lord of hosts! Omniscient One, who art the sole Indweller in every
> heart! O Lord!*
>
> *Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
> miserable world.*
>
> *O Great God! Compassionate One! O Benign Deity!*
>
> *O Byomakesa! Blue-throated One! O Lord of hosts!*
>
> *Thy body is smeared with ashes! Thou art garlanded with human
> skulls!*
>
> *Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
> miserable world.*
>
> *O Thou who dwellest on Mount Kailas! Thou whose carrier is thebull!*
>
> *O Conqueror of death! O Three-eyed One! Lord of the three worlds!*
>
> *Beloved of Narayana! Conqueror of lust! Thou, Śakti\'s Lord!*
>
> *Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
> miserable world.*
>
> *Lord of the Universe! Refuge of the whole world! O Thou of infinite
> forms!*
>
> *Soul of the Universe! O Thou in whom repose the infinite virtues of
> the world!*
>
> *O Thou adored by all! Compassionate One! O Friend of the poor!*
>
> *Rescue me, helpless as I am, from the trackless forest of this
> miserable world.*

MASTER (to Mahima): \"Why do you call the world a deep well or a
trackless forest? An aspirant may think so in the beginning; but how can
he be frightened by the world if he holds fast to God? Then he finds
that-

> *This very world is a mansion of mirth;*
>
> *Here I can eat, here drink and make merry.*

\"Why should you be frightened? Hold fast to God. What if the world is
like a forest of thorns? Put on shoes and walk on the thorns. Whom
should you fear? You won\'t have to play again the part of the \'thief\'
in the game of hide-and-seek, once you touch the granny\'.

\"King Janaka used to fence with two swords-the one of Knowledge and the
other of action. Nothing can frighten an expert player. (To M.) \"My
mind is still drawn to what he just recited.\"

Sri Ramakrishna referred to the hymns chanted by Mahima.

Nabai Chaitanya and the other devotees began to sing. They were joined
by the Master, who danced, drunk with divine love. Afterwards he said:
\"This is the one thing needful, the chanting of God\'s name. All else
is unreal. Love and devotion alone are real, and other things are of no
consequence.\"

Later Sri Ramakrishna went out in the direction of the Panchavati. He
asked M. about Binode, a student in M.\'s school, who now and then
experienced ecstasy while thinking of God. The Master loved him dearly.
As he was returning to his room with M., he asked: \"Well, some speak of
me as an Incarnation of God. What do you think about it?\" The Master
came back to his room and sat on the small couch. He repeated the
question to M. The other devotees were seated at a distance and could
not follow the conversation.

MASTER: \"What do you say?\"

M: \"I think so too. You are like Sri Chaitanya.\"

MASTER: \"Is it a full manifestation of God, or a part? Tell me how
much.\'

1.  \"I don\'t know, sir. But it is true that there is in you an
    Incarnation of the Divine Power. There is no doubt that God alone
    dwells in you.\"

MASTER: \"That is true. Chaitanya also wanted to realize Śakti, the
Divine Power.\"

Narendra was engaged in a heated discussion. Ram, who had recently
recovered from, an illness, joined him.

MASTER (to M.): \"I don\'t like such discussions. (To Ram) Will you stop
that? You haven\'t been well. All right, go on softly; don\'t get so
excited. (To M.) I don\'t like these discussions. I used to weep and
pray to the Divine Mother saying: \'O Mother, any man says it is this,
while another says it is that. Do Thou tell me, O Mother, what is the
truth.\'\"

**Saturday, March. 7, 1885**

At three o\'clack in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was in his room at
Dakshineswar conversing happily with his devotees. Baburam, the younger
Naren, Paltu, Haripada, Mohinimohan, and others were present. A young
brahmin who had been staying with the Master a few days was also
there.The Holy Mother, Sri Ramakrishna\'s wife, was living in the
nahabat. Occasianally she would come to Sri Ramakrishna\'s room to
attend to his needs. Mohinimohan had braught his wife and Nabin\'s
mother with him to the temple garden from Calcutta. The ladies were with
the Holy Mother; they were waiting far an opportunity to visit the
Master when the men devotees would leave the room.

**Master talks about his young disciples**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch. As he looked at the
young devotees his face beamed with joy.

Rākhāl was not then liying at Dakshineswar with the Master. Since his
return from Vrindāvan he had been living at home.

MASTER (smjling): \"Rākhāl is now enjoying his \'pension\'. Since his
return from Vrindāvan he has been staying at home. His wife is there.
But he said to me that he would not accept any work even if he were
offered a salary of a thousand rupees.

\"Rākhāl would lie down here and say to me that he didn\'t care even for
my campany. He was then passing through such an exalted state.

\"Bhavanāth is married; but We spends the whole night in spiritual
conversation with his wife. The couple passes their time talking of God
alone: I said to him, \'Have a little fun with your wife now and then.\'
\'What?\' he retorted angrily. \'Shall we too indulge in frivolity?\' \"

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk about Narendra.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"I haven\'t felt the same strong longing for
the younger Naren that I felt for Narendra.

(To Haripada) \"Do you go to Girish Ghosh\'s house?\"

HARIPADA: \"Yes, I go there very often. He is our neighbour.\"

MASTER: \"Does Narendra, too, go there?\"

HARIPADA: \"Yes, I see him there occasionally.\"

MASTER: \"What does he say in reply to Girish?\" \[Girish Ghosh spoke of
Sri Ramakrishna as an Incarnation of God.\]

HARIPADA: \"Narendra has been defeated in the argument.\"

MASTER: \"No, Narendra says, \'Girish Ghosh has such strong faith; why
should I contradict him?\' \"

The brother of Judge Anukal Mukhopadhyaya\'s son-in-law was in the room.
The Master asked him, \"Do you know Narendra?\"

BROTHER: \"Yes, sir. He is a very intelligent young man.\"

MASTER (to the devotees): \"He must be a good man because he speaks
highly of Narendra. Narendra was here the other day and sang with
Trailokya Sannyal. But that day his singing seemed flat to me.\"

Baburam was a student in the Entrance Class in the school where M.
taught.

MASTER (to Baburam): \"Where are your books? Aren\'t you attending to
your studies? (To M.) He wants to stick to both.

\"That is very difficult. What will you gain by knowing God partially?
Vasishthadeva, great sage that he was, was overcome at the death of his
sons. That amazed Lakshmana and he asked Rāma the reason. Rāma said:
\'Brother, what is there to wonder at? He who has knowledge has
ignorance also. Brother, go beyond both knowledge and ignorance.\' If a
thorn enters the sole of your foot, you get anothet thorn to take out
the first one. Afterwards you throw both away. Likewise, one procures
the thorn of knowledge to remove the thorn of ignorance; then one goes
beyond both knowledge and ignorance.\"

BABURAM (smiling): \"That\'s what I want.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"But, my child, can you attain it by holding to both?
If you want that, then come away.\"

BABURAM (smiling): \"Take me away from the world.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"Rākhāl lived with me, but that was different; his
father agreed to it. If these boys stay here there will be trouble.

(To Baburam) \"You have no strength of mind; you haven\'t much courage.
Just see how the younger Naren says, \'I will come away for good.\"

Sri Ramakrishna came down from the small couch and sat among the
youngsters on the floor. M. sat by his side.

**Master\'s eagerness for a spiritual companion**

MASTER (to M.): \"I have been seeking one who has totally renounced
woman and gold. When I find a young

man, I think that perhaps he will live with me; but everyone raises some
objection or other.

\"A ghost sought a companion. It is said that a man who dies on a
Saturday or Tuesday becomes a ghost. Therefore, whenever the ghost saw
anybody fall from a roof or stumble and faint on the road on either of
those days, he would run to him, hoping that the man, through an
accidental death, would become a ghost and be his companion. But such
was his ill luck that everyone revived. The poor thing could not get a
companion.

\"Just see, Rākhāl always gives his wife as an excuse. He says, \'What
will become of her?\' When I touched Narendra on the chest, he became
unconscious; then he cried out: \'Oh, what have you done to me? Don\'t
you know that I have a father and mother?\'

\"Why has God made me lead this kind of life? Chaitanyadeva became a
sannyāsi so that all would salute him. Whoever salutes an Incarnation,
even once, obtains liberation.\"

Mohinimohan had brought a basket of sweetmeats for Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER: \"Who has brought these sweets?\"

Baburam pointed to Mohinimohan.

Sri Ramakrishna touched the sweets, uttering the word \"Om\", and ate a
little. Then he distributed them among the devotees. To the surprise of
the others, he fed the younger Naren and a few of the boys with his own
hand.

MASTER (to M): \"This has a meaning. There is a greater manifestation of
God in men of pure heart. In former years, when I used to go to
Kamarpukur, I would feed some of the young boys with my own hand. Chine
Sankhari would say, \'Why doesn\'t he feed us that way?\' But how could
I? They led an immoral life. Who would feed them?\"

Sri. Ramakrishna was in the happiest mood with his young and pure-souled
devotees.. He was seated on the small couch and was doing funny
imitations of a kirtani. The devotees laughed heartily. The kirtani is
dressed lavishly and covered with ornaments. She sings standing on the
floor, a coloured kerchief in her hand. Now and then she coughs to draw
people\'s attention and blows her nose, raising her nose-ring, When a
respectable gentleman enters the room she welcomes him with appropriate
words, still continuing her song. Now and then she pulls her sari from
her arms to show off her jewels.

The devotees were convulsed, with laughter at this mimicry by Sri
Ramakrishna. Paltu rolled on the ground. Pointing to him, the Master
said to M.: \"Look at that child! He is rolling with laughter.\" He said
to Paltu with a smile: \"Don\'t report this to your father, or he will
lose the little respect he has for me. You see, he is an \'Englishman.\"

**False piety**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"There are people who indulge in all kinds of
gossip at the time of their daily devotions. As you know, one is not
permitted to talk then; so they make all kinds of signs, keeping their
lips closed. In order to say, \'Bring this\', \'Bring that\', they make
sounds like \'Huh\', \'Uhuh\'. All such things they do! (Laughter.)

\"Again, there are some who bargain for fish while telling their beads.
As they count the rosary, with a finger they point out the fish,
indicating, That one, please.\' They reserve all their business for that
time! (Laughter.)

\"There are women who come to the Ganges for their bath and, instead of
thinking of God, gossip about no end of things. \'What jewels did you
offer at the time of your son\'s marriage?\'- \'Has so-and-so returned
from her father-in law\'s house?\' - \'So-and-so is seriously ill.\' -
\'So-and-so went to see the bride; we hope that they will offer a
magnificent dowry and that there will be a great feast.\' - \'Harish
always nags at me; he can\'t stay away from me even an hour.\' - \'My
child, I couldn\'t come to see you all these days; I was so busy with
the betrothal of so-and-so\'s daughter.\'

\"You see, they have come to bathe in the holy river, and yet they
indulge in all sorts of worldly talk.\"

The Master began to look intently at the younger Naren and went into
samādhi. Did he see God Himself in the pure-souled devotee?

The devotees silently watched the figure of Sri Ramakrishna motionless
in samādhi. A few minutes before there had been so much laughter in the
room; now there was deep silence, as if no one were there. The Master
sat with folded hands as in his photograph.

After a short while his mind began to come down to the relative plane.
He heaved a long sigh and became aware of the outer world. He looked at
the devotees and began to talk with them of their spiritual progress.

MASTER (to the younger Naren): \"I have been eager to see you. You will
succeed. Come here once in a while. Well, which do you prefer-jnāna or
bhakti?\"

THE YOUNGER NAREN: \"Pure bhakti.\"

MASTER: \"But how can you love someone unless you know him? (Pointing to
M, with a smile) How can you love him unless you know him? (To M.) Since
a pure-souled person has asked for pure bhakti, it must have some
meaning.

**Genuine bhakti**

\"One does not seek bhakti of one\'s own accord without inborn
tendencies. This is the characteristic of prema-bhakti. There is another
kind of bhakti, called jnāna-bhakti, which is love of God based on
reasoning.

(To the younger Naren) \"Let me look at your body; take off your shirt.
Fairly broad chest. You will succeed. Come here now and then.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was still in the ecstatic mood. He spoke tenderly to the
other devotees about their future.

MASTER (to Paltu): \"You will succeed, too, but, it will take a little
time.

(To Baburam) \"Why don\'t I attract you to me? It is just to avoid
trouble.

(To Mohinimohan) \"As for you you are all right.There is a little yet to
be done. When that is achieved, nothing will remain-neither duty nor
work nor the world itself. Is it good to get rid of everything?\"

As Sri Ramakrishna spoke these words he looked at Mohini affectionately,
as if scanning his inmost feelings. Was Mohini really wondering whether
it would, be wise to renounce all for God? After a while Sri Ramakrishna
said, \"God binds the Bhagavata pundit to the world with one tie;
otherwise, who would remain to explain the sacred book? He keeps the
pundit bound for the good of men. That is why the Divine Mother has kept
you in the world.\"

Now Sri Ramakrishna spoke to the young brahmin.

MASTER: \"Give up knowledge and reasoning; accept bhakti. Bhakti alone
is the essence. Is this the third day of your stay here?\"

BRAHMIN (with folded hands): \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Have faith. Depend on God. Then you will not have to do
anything yourself. Mother Kāli will do everything for you.

\"Jnāna goes as far as the outer court, but bhakti can enter the inner
court. The Pure Self is unattached. Both vidyā and avidyā are in It, but
It is unattached. Sometimes there is a good and sometimes a bad smell in
the air, but the air itself is unaffected.

**Nature of Ātman**

\"Once Vyasadeva was about to cross the Jamuna. The gopis also were
there. They wanted to go to the other side of the river to sell curd,
milk, and cream. But there was no ferry at that time. They were all
worried about how to cross the river, when Vyāsa said to them, \'I am
very hungry.\' The milkmaids fed him with milk and cream. He finished
almost all their food. Then Vyāsa said to the river, \'O Jamuna, if I
have not eaten anything, then your waters will part and we shall walk
through.\' It so happened. The river parted and a pathway was formed
between the waters. Following that path, the gopis and Vyāsa crossed the
river. Vyāsa had said, \'If I have not eaten anything\'. That means, the
real man is Pure Ātman. Ātman is unattached and beyond Prakriti. It has
neither hunger nor thirst; It knows neither birth nor death; It does not
age, nor does It die. It is immutable as Mount Sumeru.

**Jeevanmukta & Separation of body and soul**

\"He who has attained this Knowledge of Brahman is a jivanmukta,
liberated while living in the body. He rightly understand that the Ātman
and the body are two separate things. After realizing God one does not
identify the Ātman with the body. These two are separate, like the
kernel and the shell of the coconut when its milk dries up. The Ātman
moves, as it were, within the body. When the \'milk\' of
worldly-mindedness has dried up, one gets Self-knowledge. Then one feels
that Ātman and body are two separate things. The kernel of a green
almond or betel-nut cannot be separated from the shell; but when they
are ripe the juice dries up and the kernel separates from the shell.
After the attainment of the Knowledge of Brahman, the \'milk\' of
worldly-mindedness dries up.

\"But it is extremely difficult to attain the Knowledge of Brahman. One
doesn\'t get it by merely talking about it. Some people feign it.
(Smiling) There was a man who was a great liar; but, on the other hand,
he used to say he had the Knowledge of Brahman. When someone took him to
task for telling lies, he said: \'Why, this world is truly like a dream.
If everything is unreal, then can truth itself be real? Truth is as
unreal as falsehood.\'\" (All laugh.)

Sri Ramakrishna sat with the devotees on the mat on the floor. He was
smiling. He said to the devotees, \"Please stroke my feet gently.\" They
carried out his request. He said to M., \"There is great significance in
this.\" Placing his hand on his heart, the Master said, \"If there is
anything here, then through this service the ignorance and illusion of
the devotees will be completely destroyed.\" Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna
became serious, as if about to reveal a secret.

**Revelation about himself**

MASTER (to M.): \"There is no outsider here. The other day, when Harish
was with me, I saw Satchidananda come out of this sheath, It said, \'I
incarnate Myself in every age.\' I thought that I myself was saying
these words out of mere fancy. I kept quiet and watched. Again
Satchidananda Itself spoke, saying, \'Chaitanya, too, worshipped
Śakti.\' \"

The devotees listened to these words in amazement. Some wondered whether
God Himself was seated before them in the form of Sri Ramakrishna. The
Master paused a moment. Then he said, addressing M., \"I saw that it is
the fullest manifestation of Satchidananda; but this time the Divine
Power is manifested through the glory of sattva.\"

The devotees sat spellbound.

MASTER (to M.): \"Just now I was saying to the Mother, \'I cannot talk
much.\' I also said to Her, \'May people\'s inner consciousness be
awakened by only one touch!\' You see, such is the power of Yogamaya
that She can cast a spell. She did so at Vrindāvan. That is why Subol
was able to unite Sri Krishna and Radhika. Yogamaya, the Primal Power,
has a power of attraction. I applied that power myself.

(To M.) \"Well, do you think that those who come here are realizing
anything?\"

M: \"Yes, sir, it must be so.\"

MASTER: \"How do you know?\"

M. (smiling): \"Everyone says, \'Whoever goes to him doesn\'t return to
the world.\'

MASTER (smiling): \"A bullfrog was caught by a water-snake. The snake
could neither swallow the frog nor let it go. As a result the frog
suffered very much; he croaked continuously. And the snake suffered too.
But if the frog had been seized by a cobra, he would have been quiet
after one or two croaks. (All laugh.)

(To the young devotees) \"Read the Bhaktichaitanya- chandrika by
Trailokya. Ask Trailokya for a copy. He has written well about
Chaitanyadeva.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Will he give it to us?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Why not? If a farmer has a good crop of melons he
can easily give away two or three. (All laugh.) Won\'t Trailokya give
you the book free?

(To Paltu) \"Come here now and then.\"

PALTU: \"I shall come whenever I can.\"

MASTER: \"Will you see me in Calcutta when I go there?\"

PALTU: \"Yes, I shall try.\"

MASTER; \"That\'s the answer of a calculating mind.\"

PALTU: \"If I don\'t say, \'I shall try\', I may be a liar.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"I don\'t mind the lies of these boys. They are not
free.

(To Haripada) \"Why hasn\'t Mahendra Mukherji come here lately?\"

HARlPADA: \"I\'m not quite sure why.\"

M. (smiling): \"He\'s practising jnanayoga!\"

MASTER: \"No, it\'s not that. The other day he promised to send me in
his carriage to the theatre to see a play about the life of Prahlada;
but he didn\'t send the carriage. Perhaps that is why he doesn\'t
come.\"

M: \"One day I saw Mahima Chakravarty and had a talk with him. It seems
that Mahendra visits him.\"

MASTER: \"But Mahima talks about bhakti also. He loves to recite the
hymn: \'what need is there of penance if God is worshipped with love?\'
\"

M. (smiling): \"He says that because you make him say it.\"

**About Girish**

Girish Chandra Ghosh was always talking to the devotees about the
Master.

HARIPADA: \"Girish Ghosh sees many visions nowadays. After going home
from here he remains absorbed in spiritual moods and sees many things.\"

MASTER: \'That may be true. Coming to the Ganges, one sees many
things-boats, ships, and what not.\"

HARIPADA: \"Girish Ghosh says: \'From now on I shall occupy myself only
with my work. In the morning, on the

stroke of the clock, I shall sit down with my pen and ink-pot and write
for the whole day.\' He makes the resolve, no doubt, but cannot carry it
out. No sooner do we visit him than he begins to talk about you. You
asked him to send Narendra here in a carriage. He said, \'I shall hire a
carriage for Narendra.\' \"

At five o\'clock the younger Naren was ready to go home. Sri Ramakrishna
stood by his side on the northeast verandah and gave him various
instructions. Then the boy saluted the Master and departed. Many of the
devotees also took their leave.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch talking to Mohini.
Mohini\'s wife was almost mad with grief on account of her son\'s death.
Sometimes she laughed and sometimes she wept. But she felt peaceful in
Sri Ramakrishna\'s presence.

MASTER: \"How is your wife now?\"

MOHINI: \"She becomes quiet whenever she is here; but sometimes at home
she becomes very wild. The other day she was going to kill herself.\"

When Sri Ramakrishna heard this he appeared worried. Mohini said to him
humbly, \"Please give her a few words of advice.\"

MASTER: \"Don\'t allow her to cook. That will heat her brain all the
more. And keep her in the company of others so that they may watch
her.\"

It was dusk. Preparations were going on in the temples for the evening
worship. The lamp was lighted in the Master\'s room and incense was
burnt. Seated on the small couch, Sri Ramakrishna saluted the Divine
Mother and chanted Her name in a tender voice. There was nobody in the
room except M, who was sitting on the floor.

Sri Ramakrishna rose from the couch. M also stood up. The Master asked
him to shut the west and north doors of the room. M obeyed and stood by
Sri Ramakrishna on the porch. The Master said that he wanted to go to
the Kāli temple. Leaning on M.\'s arm, he came down to the terrace of
the temple. He asked M. to call Baburam and sat down.

After visiting the Divine Mother, the Master returned to his room across
the court, chanting, \"O Mother! Mother! Rajarajesvari!\"

Sri Ramakrishna entered his room and sat on the small couch. He had been
passing through an extraordinary state of mind: he could not touch any
metal. He had said a few days before, \"It seems that the Divine Mother
has been removing from my mind all ideas of possession.\" He had been
eating from plantain-leaves and drinking water from an earthen tumbler.
He could not touch a metal jar; so he had asked the devotees to get a
few earthen jars for him. If he touched metal plates or pots, his hand
ached as if stung by a horned fish.

Prasanna had brought a few earthen pots, but they were very small. The
Master said with a smile: These pots are too small. But he is a nice
boy. Once I asked him to take off his clothes, and he stood naked in
front of me. What a child he is!\"

Tārak of Belgharia arrived with a friend and bowed low before Sri
Ramakrishna, who was sitting on the small couch. The room was lighted by
an oil lamp. A few devotees were sitting on the floor.

Tārak was about twenty years old, and married. His parents did not allow
him to come to Sri Ramakrishna. He lived mostly at his home near
Bowbazar. The Master was very fond of him. Tārak\'s friend had a tamasic
nature; he rather scoffed at the Master and religious ideas in general.

MASTER (to Tārak\'s friend): \"Why don\'t you go and visit the
temples?\"

> FRIEND: \"Oh, I\'ve seen them before.\"
>
> MASTER: \"Is it wrong for Tārak to come here?\"
>
> FRIEND: \"You know best.\"
>
> MASTER (pointing to M.): \"He is a headmaster.\"
>
> FRIEND: \"Oh!\"
>
> **Master warns Tārak**
>
> Sri Ramakrishna asked about Tatak\'s health and talked with him at
> length. Tārak was ready to leave. Sri Ramakrishna asked him to be
> careful about many things.
>
> MASTER: \"My good man, beware. Beware of \'woman and gold\'. Once you
> sink in the māyā of a woman, you will not be able to rise. It is the
> whirlpool of the Viśālākśi. He who has fallen into it cannot pull
> himself out again. Come here now and then.\"
>
> TĀRAK: \"My people at home don\'t let me.\"
>
> A DEVOTEE: \"Suppose someone\'s mother says to him, \'Don\'t go to
> Dakshineswar.\' Suppose she curses him, saying, \'If you go there you
> will be drinking my blood!\'\"
>
> MASTER: \"A mother who says that is no mother; she is the embodiment
> of avidyā. There is no sin in disobeying such a mother. She obstructs
> her son\'s path to God. There is no harm in disobeying your elders for
> the sake of God. For Rāma\'s sake Bharat did not obey his mother
> Kaikeyi. The gopis did not obey their husbands when they were
> forbidden to visit Krishna. Prahlada disobeyed his father for God.
> Vali disregarded the words of Sukracharya, his teacher, in order to
> please God. Bibhishana went against the wishes of Ravana, his elder
> brother, to please Rāma. But you must obey your elders in all other
> things. Let me see your hand.\"
>
> Sri Ramakrishna took Tārak\'s hand into his own and seemed to feel its
> weight. A few moments later he said: \"There is a little crookedness
> in your mind; but that will go. Pray to God a little and come here now
> and then. Yes, that twist will go. Is it you that have hired the house
> at Bowbazar?\"
>
> TĀRAK: \"Not I, sir, but my parents.\"
>
> MASTER (smiling): \"They or you? Is it because you are afraid of the
> \'tiger\'?\" Tārak had a young wife. Did the Master mean that a woman
> is like a tiger to a man?
>
> Tārak saluted Sri Ramakrishna and took his leave. The Master lay down
> on the small couch. He seemed worried about Tārak. Suddenly he said to
> M., \"Why do I worry so much about these young boys?\" M. kept still.
> He was thinking over a reply. The Master asked him, \"Why don\'t you
> speak?\"
>
> Mohini\'s wife entered the room and sat at one side. Sri Ramakrishna
> spoke to M. about Tārak\'s friend.
>
> MASTER: \"Why did Tārak bring that fellow with him?\"

1.  \"Perhaps he wanted a companion for the road. It is a long way from
    Calcutta; so he brought a friend with him.\"

> The Master suddenly addressed Mohini\'s wife and said: \"By unnatural
> death one becomes an evil spirit. Beware. Make it clear to your mind.
> Is this what you have come to after hearing and seeing so much?\"
> Mohini was about to take his leave. He saluted Sri Ramakrishna. His
> wife also saluted the Master, who stood near the north door of the
> room. Mohini\'s wife spoke to him in a whisper.

MASTER: \"Do you want to stay here?\"

MOHINI\'S WIFE: \"Yes, I want to spend a few days with the Holy Mother
at the Nahabat. May I?\"

MASTER: \"That will be all right. But you talk of dying. That frightens
me. And the Ganges is so near!\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 38**

WITH THE DEVOTEES IN CALCUTTA

> March 11, 1885

**Balarām Bose**

ON THE MORNING of Wednesday, March 11, Sri Ramakrishna and some of his
disciples visited Balarām Bose\'s house. Balarām was indeed blessed
among the householder disciples of the Master. Sri Ramakrishna often
described him as a rasaddar, or supplier of stores, appointed by the
Divine Mother to take care of his physical needs. Balarām\'s house in
Calcutta had been sanctified many times by the Master\'s presence. There
he frequently lost himself in samādhi, dancing, singing, or talking
about God. Those of the Master\'s disciples and devotees who could not
go to Dakshineswar visited him there and received his instruction. He
often asked Balarām to invite young disciples such as Rākhāl ,
Bhavanāth, and Narendra to his house, saying: \"These pure souls are
veritable manifestations of God. To feed them is to feed God Himself.
They are born with special divine attributes. By serving them you will
be serving God.\" And so it happened that whenever the Master was at
Balarām\'s house the devotees would gather there. It was the Master\'s
chief vineyard in Calcutta. It was here that the devotees came to know
each other intimately.

M taught in a school in the neighbourhood. He often brought his young
students to visit the Master at Balarām\'s house. On this day, having
learnt of Sri Ramakrishna\'s arrival, M. went there at noon during the
recess hour of the school. He found the Master resting in the drawing
room after his midday meal. Several young boys were in the room. M
prostrated himself before the Master and sat by his side.

MASTER (tenderly): \"How could you come now? Have you no school work?\"

M: \"I have come directly from school. Just now I have no important work
to do.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"No, sir; he is playing truant today.\" (All laugh.)

M. said to himself, \"Alas! It is indeed as if some invisible power had
drawn me here.\"

The Master, looking a little thoughtful, asked M. to come nearer. He
said, \"Please wring out my wet towel and put my coat in the sun.\" Then
he continued: \"My legs and feet ache. Please rub them gently.\"

M. felt very happy to be given the privilege of rendering these services
to the Master.

**Master\'s exalted spiritual state**

Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: \"Can you tell me why I have been feeling
like this the past few days? It is impossible for me to touch any metal.
When I touched a metal cup I felt as if I had been stung by a horned
fish. There was an excruciating pain all over my arm. But I must use a
brass water-jar, and so I tried to carry it after covering it with my
towel. But the moment I touched the jar I felt the same acute pain in my
arm. It was an unbearable pain! At last I prayed to the Divine Mother:
\'O Mother, I shall never do it again. Please forgive me this time.\'

**The younger Naren**

\"The younger Naren often visits me. Do you think his people at home
will object? He is very pure and doesn\'t know what carnal pleasure
is.\"

M: \"He is a \'large receptacle\'.\"

MASTER: \"That is true. Further, he says he remembers spiritual things
after hearing them once only. He told me, \'I used to weep in my boyhood
because I couldn\'t see God.\'\"

The Master and M. were thus talking about the young devotee when someone
reminded M. of his school.

MASTER: \"What is the time now?\"

A DEVOTEE: \"It is ten minutes to one.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"You had better go now. It is getting late for you. You
have left your duties. (To Lātu) Where is Rākhāl ?\"

LĀTU: \"He has gone home.\"

MASTER: \"What? Has he gone away without seeing me?\"

After school-hours M. returned to Balarām\'s house and found the Master
sitting in the drawing-room, surrounded by his devotees and disciples.
Among them were Girish, Suresh, Balarām, Lātu, and Chunilal. The
Master\'s face was beaming with a sweet smile, which was reflected in
the happy faces of those in the room. M. was asked to take a seat by the
Master\'s side.

MASTER (to Girish): \"You had better argue this point with Narendra and
see what he has to say.\"

GIRISH: \"Narendra says that God is infinite; we cannot even so much as
say that the things or persons we perceive are parts of God. How can
Infinity have parts? It cannot.\"

**Mystery of Divine Incarnation**

MASTER: \"However great and infinite God may be, His Essence can and
does manifest itself through man by His mere will. God\'s Incarnation as
a man cannot be explained by analogy. One must feel it for oneself and
realize it by direct perception. An analogy can give us only a little
glimpse. By touching the horns, legs, or tail of a cow, we in fact touch
the cow herself; but for us the essential thing about a cow is her milk,
which comes through the udder. The Divine Incarnation is like the udder.
God incarnates Himself as man from time to time in order to teach people
devotion and divine love.\"

GIRISH: \"Narendra says: \'Is it ever possible to know all of God? He is
infinite.\' \"

MASTER (to Girish): \"Who can comprehend everything about God? It is not
given to man to know any aspect of God, great or small. And what need is
there to know everything about God? It is enough if we only realize Him.
And we see God Himself if we but see His Incarnation. Suppose a person
goes to the Ganges and touches its water. He will then say, \'Yes, I
have seen and touched the Ganges.\' To say this it is not necessary for
him to touch the whole length of the river from Hardwar to Gangasagar.
(Laughter.)

\"If I touch your feet, surely that is the same as touching you.
(Laughter.) If a person goes to the ocean and touches but a little of
its water, he has surely touched the ocean itself. Fire, as an element,
exists in all things, but in wood it is present to a greater degree.\"

GIRISH (smiling): \"I am looking for fire. Naturally I want to go to a
place where I can get it.\"

**Seek God in man**

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, fire, as an element, is present more in wood
than in any other object. If you seek God, then seek Him in man; He
manifests Himself more in man than in any other thing. If you see a man
endowed with ecstatic love, overflowing with prema, mad after God,
intoxicated with His love, then know for certain that God has incarnated
Himself through that man.

(To M.) \"There is no doubt that God exists in all things; but the
manifestations of His Power are different in different beings. The
greatest manifestation of His Power is through an Incarnation. Again, in
some Incarnation there is a complete manifestation of God\'s Power. It
is the Śakti, the Power of God, that is born as an Incarnation.\"

GIRISH: \"Narendra says that God is beyond our words and thought.\"

**God known to the pure mind**

MASTER: \"That is not altogether true. He is, no doubt, unknowable by
this ordinary mind, but He can indeed be known by the pure mind. The
mind and intellect become pure the moment they are free from attachment
to \'woman and gold\'. The pure mind and pure intellect are one and the
same. God is known by the pure mind. Didn\'t the sages and seers of
olden times see God? They realized the All-pervading Consciousness by
means of their inner consciousness.\"

GIRISH (with a smile): \"I defeated Narendra in the argument.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, no! He said to me: \'When Girish Ghosh has so much faith
in God\'s Incarnation as man, what can I say to him? It is not proper to
meddle with such faith.\'\"

GIRISH (with a smile): \"Sir, we are very free and easy with our words.

But M. is sitting there with his lips shut tight. What in the world is
passing through his mind? What do you say about it, sir?\"

MASTER (with a laugh): \"There is a common adage that tells people to
beware of the following: a man with a loose tongue, a man whose mind
cannot be fathomed even by an expert diver, a man who sticks the sacred
tulsi-leaf in his ears as a sign of holiness, a woman wearing a long
veil to proclaim her chastity, and the cold water of a reservoir covered
with green scum, by bathing in which one gets typhoid fever. These are
all dangerous things. (With a smile) But it is different with M. He is a
serious man.\" (All laugh.)

CHUNILAL: \"People have begun to whisper about M.\'s conduct. The
younger Naren and Baburam are his students, as are Naran, Paltu, Purna,
and Tejchandra. The rumour is that he brings these boys to you and so
they neglect their studies. The boys\' guardians hold M. responsible.\"

MASTER: \"But who would believe their words?\"

**Master\'s love for Narayan**

They were thus talking when Naran entered the room and bowed low before
the Master. He was a student seventeen or eighteen years old and of fair
complexion. He was dearly loved by the Master, who was very eager to see
the boy and feed him. Many a time at the temple garden at Dakshineswar
the Master wept silently for Naran. He looked on him as the
manifestation of Narayana Himself.

GIRISH (at the sight of Naran): \"There! Who told him about this? Now we
realize that M. is at the root of all the mischief.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): \"Stop! Hold your tongue. There is already an evil
rumour about him.\"

The conversation next turned to Narendra.

A DEVOTEE: \"Why doesn\'t he come to you so frequently nowadays?\"

MASTER (quoting a proverb): \"Man\'s worries over bread and butter are
simply amazing; they make even Kalidasa lose his wits.\"

BALARĀM: \"Narendra frequently visits his friend Annada Guha of the
family of Shiva Guha.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, I have heard that too. Narendra and his friends meet at
the house of a government officer and conduct meetings of the Brahmo
Samaj there.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"The officer\'s name is Tarapada.\"

BALARĀM (smiling): \"The brahmins say that Annada Guha is a very
egotistic man.\"

MASTER: \"Never listen to what the brahmins say. You know their nature
very well. If a man doesn\'t give them money, they will call him bad; on
the other hand, if a man is generous to them, they will call him good.
(All laugh.) I know Annada. He is a good man.\"

The drawing-room was full of devotees. The Master wanted to hear some
songs. At his request Tarapada sang about Krishna:

> *O Kesava, bestow Thy grace*
>
> *Upon Thy luckless servants here!*
>
> *O Kesava, who dost delight*
>
> *To roam Vrindāvan\'s glades and groves!*
>
> *O Madhava, our mind\'s Bewitcher!*
>
> *Sweet One, who dost steal our hearts,*
>
> *Sweetly playing on Thy flute!*
>
> *(Chant, O Mind, the name of Hari,*
>
> *Sing aloud the name of Hari,*
>
> *Praise Lord Hari\'s name!)*
>
> *O Thou Eternal Youth of Braja,*
>
> *Tamer of fierce Kaliya,*
>
> *Slayer of the afflicted\'s fear!*
>
> *Beloved, with the arching eyes*
>
> *And crest with arching peacock feather,*
>
> *Charmer of Sri Radha\'s heart!*
>
> *Govardhan\'s mighty Lifter, Thou,*
>
> *All garlanded with sylvan flowers!*
>
> *O Damodara, Kamsa\'s Scourge!*
>
> *O Dark One, who dost sport in bliss*
>
> *With sweet Vrindāvan\'s gopi maids.*
>
> *(Chant, O mind, the name of Hari,*
>
> *Sing aloud the name of Hari,*
>
> *Praise Lord Hari\'s name!)*

MASTER (to Girish): \"Ah! It is a beautiful song. Did you write it?\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Yes, sir, he wrote all the songs for his play, the
Chaitanyalila.\"

MASTER: \"This one has really hit the mark.\"

At Sri Ramakrishna\'s request Tarapada sang two more songs. In the
first,

Radha\'s love for Sri Krishna:

Nitai exhorts people to share

> *Come one and all! Take Radha\'s love!*
>
> *The high tide of her love flows by;*
>
> *It will not last for very long.*
>
> *Oh, come then! Come ye, one and all!*
>
> *In countless streams it flows from her;*
>
> *As much as you desire is yours.*
>
> *Made all of love, she pours out love*
>
> *Unstintingly for everyone;*
>
> *Her love intoxicates the heart*
>
> *With heavenly bliss, and thrills the soul.*
>
> *Oh, come and sing Lord Hari\'s name,*
>
> *Drawn by her love. Oh, come ye all!*
>
> *Next he sang about Gaurānga:*
>
> *Who art Thou, Gaur of the golden hue,*
>
> *That quenchest the thirst of my soul?*
>
> *Thou raisest a storm in the sea of Love,*
>
> *And scarcely can I steady my boat.*
>
> *Once as a cowherd boy in Vrindāvan*
>
> *Thou didst tend the cows;*
>
> *In Thy hands Thou heldest the flute*
>
> *That so bewitched the gopi maids;*
>
> *Lifting Govardhan\'s mount in Thine arms,*
>
> *Thou shieldedst Vrindāvan from ill;*
>
> *And at the wounded gopis\' feet*
>
> *Humbledst Thyself in repentant love.*

The devotees pressed M. to sing; but M. was shy and asked them in a
whisper to excuse him.

GIRISH (to the Master): \"Sir, we can\'t find a way to persuade M. to
sing.\"

MASTER (annoyed): \"Yes, he can bare his teeth at school, but shyness
overpowers him when he is asked to sing!\"

M., feeling greatly distressed, remained speechless.Suresh Mitra, a
beloved householder disciple of the Master, was seated at a distance,
The Master cast an affectionate glance at him and said to him, pointing
to Girish, \"You talk of having lived a wild life but here is one you
could not surpass.\"

SURESH (with a smile): \"Yes, sir, he is my elder brother in that
respect.\"(All laugh.)

GIRISH (to the Master): \"Well, sir, I didn\'t have any education during
my boyhood, but still people say I am a learned man.\"

MASTER: \"Mahimacharan has studied many scriptures. A big man. (To M.)
Isn\'t that so?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

GIRISH: \"What? Book-learning? I have seen enough of it. It can\'t fool
me any more.\"

**The purpose of the scriptures**

MASTER (with a smile): \"Do you know my attitude? Books, scriptures, and
things like that only point out the way to reach God. After finding the
way, what more need is there of books and scriptures? Then comes the
time for action.

\"A man received a letter from home informing him that certain presents
were to be sent to his relatives. The names of the articles were given
in the letter. As he was about to go shopping for them, he found that
the letter was missing. He began anxiously to search for it, several
others joining in the search. For a long time they continued to search.
When at last the letter was discovered, his joy knew no bounds. With
great eagerness he opened the letter and read it. It said that he was to
buy five seers of sweets, a piece of cloth,

and a few other things. Then he did not need the letter any more, for it
had served its purpose. Putting it aside, he went out to buy the things.
How long is such a letter necessary? As long as its contents are not
known. When the contents are known one proceeds to carry out the
directions. \"In the scriptures you will find the way to realize God.
But after getting all the information about the path, you must begin to
work, Only then can you attain your goal.

**Mere scholarship condemned**

\"What will it avail a man to have mere scholarship? A pundit may have
studied many scriptures, he may recite many sacred texts, but if he is
still attached to the world and if inwardly he loves \'woman and gold\',
then he has not assimilated the contents of the scriptures. For such a
man the study of scriptures is futile.

\"The almanac forecasts the rainfall for the year. You may squeeze the
book, but you won\'t get a drop of water-not even a single drop.\"
(Laughter.)

GIRISH (sniiling): \"What did you say, sir, about squeezing the almanac?
Won\'t a single drop of water come out of it?\" (All laugh.)

MASTER (with a s1Ilile): \"The pundits talk big, but where is their mind
fixed? On \'woman and gold\', on creature comforts and money. The
vulture soars very high in the sky, but its eyes are fixed on the
charnel-pit. It is continually looking for charnel-pits, carcasses, and
dead bodies.

**Narendra\'s many virtues**

(To Girish) \"Narendra is a boy of a very high order. He excels in
everything: vocal and instrumental music and studies. Again, he has
control over his sense-organs. He is truthful and has discrimination and
dispassion. So many virtues in one person! (To M.) What do you say?
Isn\'t he unusually good?\"

M: \"Yes, sir, he is.\"

MASTER (aside to M.): \"He \[meaning Girish\] has great earnestness and
faith.\"

M. looked at Girish, and marvelled at his tremendous faith. Girish had
been coming to Sri Ramakrishna only a short time and had already
recognized his spiritual power. To M. he seemed a familiar friend and
kinsman, related to him by the strong bond of spirituality. Girish was
one of the gems in the necklace of the Master\'s devotees.

Narayan asked the Master whether he would sing. Sri Ramakrishna sang of
the Divine Mother:

> *Cherish my precious Mother Syama*
>
> *Tenderly within, O mind;*
>
> *May you and I alone behold Her,*
>
> *Letting no one else intrude.*
>
> *O mind, in solitude enjoy Her,*
>
> *Keeping the passions all outside;*
>
> *Take but the tongue, that now and again*
>
> *It may cry out, \"O Mother! Mother!\"*
>
> *Suffer no breath of base desire*
>
> *To enter and approach us there,*
>
> *But bid true knowledge stand on guard,*
>
> *Alert and watchful evermore.*

Then he sang, as if he were one of the afflicted souls of the world:

> *O Mother, ever blissful as Thou art,*
>
> *Do not deprive Thy worthless child of bliss!*
>
> *My mind knows nothing but Thy Lotus Feet*
>
> *The King of Death scowls at me terribly;*
>
> *Tell me, Mother, what shall I say to him? . . .*

Again he sang about the bliss of the Divine Mother:

> *Behold my Mother playing with Śiva, lost in an ecstasy of joy!*
>
> *Drunk with a draught of celestial wine, She reels and yet She does
> not fall . . .*

The devotees listened to the songs in deep silence. After a few moments
Sri Ramakrishna said, \"I have a slight cold; so I couldn\'t sing
well.\"

Gradually it became dusk. The shadow of evening fell on Calcutta. For
the moment the noise of the busy metropolis was stilled. Gongs and
conch-shells proclaimed the evening worship in many Hindu homes.
Devotees of God set aside their worldly duties and turned their minds to
prayer and meditation. This joining of day and night, this mystic
twilight, always created an ecstatic mood in the Master.

**Master\'s prayer**

The devotees seated in the room looked at Sri Ramakrishna as he began to
chant the sweet name of the Divine Mother. After the chanting he began
to pray. What was the need of prayer to a soul in constant communion
with God? Did he not rather want to teach erring mortals how to pray?
Addressing the Divine Mother, he said, \"O Mother, I throw myself on Thy
mercy; I take shelter at Thy Hallowed Feet. I do not want bodily
comforts; I do not crave name and fame; I do not seek the eight occult
powers. Be gracious and grant that I may have pure love for Thee, a love
unsmitten by desire, untainted by any selfish ends-a love craved by the
devotee for the sake of love alone. And grant me the favour, O mother,
that I may not be deluded by Thy world-bewitching māyā, that I may never
be attached to the world, to \'woman and gold\', conjured up by Thy
inscrutable māyā! O mother, there is no one but thee whom I may call my
own. Mother, I do not know how to worship; I am without austerity; I
have neither devotion nor knowledge. Be gracious, Mother, and out of Thy
infinite mercy grant me love for Thy Lotus Feet.\" Every word of this
prayer, uttered from the depths of his soul, stirred the minds of the
devotees. The melody of his voice and the childlike simplicity of his
face touched their hearts very deeply.

Girish invited the Master to his house, saying that he must go there
that very night.

MASTER: \"Don\'t you think it will be late?\"

GIRISH: \"No, sir. You may return any time you like. I shall have to go
to the theatre tonight to settle a quarrel there.\"

It was nine o\'clock in the evening when the Master was ready to start
for Girish\'s house. Since Balarām had prepared supper for him, Sri
Ramakrishna said to Balarām: \"Please send the food you have prepared
for me to Girish\'s, I shall enjoy it there.\" He did not want to hurt
Balarām\'s feelings.

As the Master was coming down from the second floor of Balarām\'s house,
he became filled with divine ecstasy. He looked as if he were drunk.

Narayan and M. were by his side; a little behind came Ram, Chuni, and
the other devotees. No sooner did he reach the ground floor than he
became totally overwhelmed. Narayan came forward to hold him by the hand
lest he should miss his footing and fall. The Master expressed annoyance
at this. A few minutes later he said to Narayan affectionately: \"If you
hold me by the hand people may think I am drunk. I shall walk by
myself.\"

Girish\'s house was not far away. The Master passed the crossing at
Bosepara Lane. Suddenly he began to walk faster. The devotees were left
behind. Presently Narendra was seen coming from a distance. At other
times the Master\'s joy would have been unbounded at the thought of
Narendra or at the mere mention of his name; but now he did not even
exchange a word with his beloved disciple.

As the Master and the devotees entered the lane where Girish lived, he
was able to utter words. He said to Narendra: \"Are you quite well, my
child? I could not talk to you then.\" Every word the Master spoke was
full of infinite tenderness. He had not yet reached the door of
Girish\'s house, when suddenly he stopped and said, looking at Narendra:
\"I want to tell you something. \'This\' is one and \'that\' is
another.\" Who could know what was passing through his innermost soul at
that moment?

**At Girish\'s house**

Girish stood at the door to welcome the Master. As Sri Ramakrishna
entered the house, Girish fell at his feet and lay there on the floor
like a rod. At the Master\'s bidding he stood up, touching the Master\'s
feet with his forehead. Sri Ramakrishna was taken to the drawing- room
on the second floor. The devotees followed him and sat down, eager to
get a view of the Master and listen to every word that fell from his
lips.

As Sri Ramakrishna was about to take the seat reserved for him, he saw a
newspaper lying near it. He signed to someone to remove the paper. Since
a newspaper contains worldly matters-gossip and scandal-, he regarded it
as unholy. After the paper was removed he took his seat. Nityagopal came
forward and bowed low before the Master.

MASTER: \"Well! You haven\'t been to Dakshineswar for a long time.\"

NITYAGOPAL: \"True, sir. I haven\'t been able to go there. I haven\'t
been well. I have had pains all over my body.\"

MASTER: \"How are you now?\"

NITYAGOPAL: \"Not so well, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Bring your mind down one or two notes.\"

NITYAGOPAL: \"I don\'t like people\'s company. They say all kinds of
things about me. That sometimes frightens me, but again I feel great
strength within.\"

MASTER: \"That\'s only natural. Who lives with you?\"

NITYAGOPAL: \"Tārak. He is always with me. But sometimes he too gets on
my nerves.\"

MASTER: \"Nangta told me that there lived at his monastery an ascetic
who had acquired occult powers. He used to go about with his eyes fixed
on the sky. But when one of his companions left him, he became
disconsolate.\"

Again the Master went into an ecstatic mood. Strange thoughts seemed to
stir his mind and he remained speechless. After a while he said: \"Art
Thou come? I too am here.\" Who could pretend to understand these words?

**Narendra and Girish argue about God**

Many of his devotees were in the room: Narendra, Girish, Ram, Haripada,
Chuni, Balarām, and M. Narendra did not believe that God could incarnate
Himself in a human body. But Girish differed with him; he had the
burning faith that from time to time the Almighty Lord, through His
inscrutable Power, assumes a human body and descends to earth to serve a
divine purpose.

The Master said to Girish, \"I should like to hear you and Narendra
argue in English.\"

The discussion began; but they talked in Bengali. Narendra said: \"God
is Infinity. How is it possible for us to comprehend Him? He dwells in
every human being. It is not the case that He manifests Himself through
one person only.\"

SRI RAMAKRISHNA (tenderly): \"I quite agree with Narendra. God is
everywhere. But then you must remember that there are different
manifestations of His Power in different beings. At some places there is
a manifestation of His avidyaŚakti, at others a manifestation of His
vidyaŚakti. Through different instruments God\'s Power is manifest in
different degrees, greater and smaller. Therefore all men are not
equal.\"

RAM: \"What is the use of these futile arguments?\"

MASTER (sharply): \"No! No! There is a meaning in all this.\"

GIRISH (to Narendra): \"How do you know that God does not assume a human
body?\"

NARENDRA: \"God is beyond words or thought.\"

MASTER: \"No, that is not true. He can be known by the pure buddhi,
which is the same as the Pure Self. The seers of old directly perceived
the Pure Self through their pure buddhi.\"

GIRISH (to Narendra): \"Unless God Himself teaches men through, His
human Incarnation, who else will teach them spiritual mysteries? God
takes a human body to teach men divine knowledge and divine love.
Otherwise, who will teach?\"

NARENDRA: \"Why, God dwells in our own heart; He will certainly teach us
from within the heart.\"

MASTER (tenderly): \"Yes, yes. He will teach us as our Inner Guide.\"

Gradually Narendra and Girish became involved in a heated discussion. If
God is Infinity, how can He have parts? What did Hamilton say? What were
the views of Herbert Spencer, of Tyndall, of Huxley? And so forth and so
on.

MASTER (to M.): \"I don\'t enjoy these discussions. Why should I argue
at all? I clearly see that God is everything; He Himself has become all.
I see that whatever is, is God. He is everything; again, He is beyond
everything. I come to a state in which my mind and intellect merge in
the Indivisible. At the sight of Narendra my mind loses itself in the
consciousness of the Absolute. (To Girish) What do you say to that?\"

GIRISH (with a smile): \"Why ask me? As if I understood everything
except that one point!\" (All laugh.)

MASTER: \"Again, I cannot utter a word unless I come down at least two
steps from the plane of samādhi. Sankara\'s Non-dualistic explanation of
Vedānta is true, and so is the Qualified Non-dualistic interpretation of
Ramanuja.\"

**Qualified Monism**

NARENDRA: \"What is Qualified Non-dualism?\"

MASTER: \"It is the theory of Ramanuja.. According to this theory,
Brahman, or the Absolute, is qualified by the universe and its living
beings: These three-Brahman, the world, and living beings-together
constitute One. Take the instance of a bel-fruit. A man wanted to know
the weight of the fruit. He separated the shell, the flesh, and the
seeds. But can a man get the weight by weighing only the flesh? He must
weigh flesh, shell, and seeds together. At first it appears that the
real thing in the fruit is the flesh, and not its seeds or shell. Then
by reasoning you find that the shell, seeds, and flesh all belong to the
fruit; the shell and seeds belong to the same thing that the flesh
belongs to. Likewise, in spiritual discrimination one must first reason,
following the method of \'Not this, not this\': God is not the universe;
God is not the living beings; Brahman alone is real, and all else is
unreal. Then one realizes, as with the bel-fruit, that the Reality from
which we derive the notion of Brahman is the very Reality that evolves
the idea of living beings and the universe. The Nitya and the Lila

are the two aspects of one and the same Reality; therefore, according to
Ramanuja, Brahman is qualified by the universe and the living beings.
This is the theory of Qualified Non-dualism.

**Futility of mere reasoning**

(To M.) \"I do see God directly. What shall I reason about? I clearly
see that He Himself has become everything; that He Himself has become
the universe and all living beings.

\"But without awakening one\'s own inner consciousness one cannot
realize the All-pervading Consciousness. How long does a man reason? So
long as he has not realized God. But mere words will not do. As for
myself, I clearly see that He Himself has become everything. The inner
consciousness must be awakened through the grace of God. Through this
awakening a man goes into samādhi. He often forgets that he has a body.
He gets rid of his attachment to \'woman and gold\' and does not enjoy
any talk unless it is about God. Worldly talk gives him pain. Through
the awakening of the inner consciousness one realizes the All-pervading
Consciousness.\"

The discussion came to a close. Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: \"I have
observed that a man acquires one kind of knowledge about God through
reasoning and another kind through meditation; but he acquires a third
kind of Knowledge about God when God reveals Himself to him, His
devotee. If God Himself reveals to His devotee the nature of Divine
Incarnation-how He plays in human form-, then the devotee doesn\'t have
to, reason about the problem or need an explanation. Do you know what it
is like? Suppose a man is in a dark room. He goes on rubbing a match
against a match-box and all of a sudden light comes. Likewise, if God
gives us this flash of divine light, all our doubts are destroyed. Can
one ever know God by mere reasoning?\"

Sri Ramakrishna asked Narendra to sit by his side. He tenderly inquired
about his health and showed him much affection.

NARENDRA (to the Master): \"Why, I have meditated on Kāli for three or
four days, but nothing has come of it.\"

**Kāli and Brahman**

MASTER: \"All in good time, my child. Kāli is none other than Brahman
That which is called Brahman is really Kāli. She is the Primal Energy.
When that Energy remains inactive, I call It Brahman, and when It
creates. preserves, or destroys, I call It Śakti or Kāli. What you call
Brahman I call Kāli.

\"Brahman and Kāli are not different. They are like fire and its power
to burn: if one thinks of fire one must think of its power to burn. If
one recognizes Kāli one must also recognize Brahman; again, if one
recognizes Brahman one must recognize Kāli. Brahman and Its Power are
identical. It is Brahman whom I address as Śakti or Kāli.\"

It was late at night: Girish asked Haripada to call a cab, for he had to
go to the theatre. As Haripada was

about to leave the room the Master said with a smile: \"Mind, a cab.
Don\'t forget to bring one.\" (All laugh.)

HARIPADA (smiling): \"Yes, sir. I am going out just for that. How can I
forget it?\"

GIRISH: \"That I should have to go to the theatre and leave you here!\"

MASTER: \"No, no. You must hold to both. King Janaka paid attention to
both religious and worldly duties and \'drank his milk from a brimming
cup\'.\" (All laugh.)

GIRISH: \"I have been thinking of leaving the theatre to the
youngsters.\"

MASTER: \"No, no. It is all right. You are doing good to many.\"

Narendra said in a whisper, \"Just a moment ago he \[meaning Girish\]
was calling him \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\] God, an Incarnation, and now
he is attracted to the theatre!\"

**Master\'s love for Narendra**

Narendra was sitting beside the Master. The latter looked at him
intently and suddenly moved closer to his beloved disciple. Narendra did
not believe in God\'s assuming a human body; but what did that matter?
Sri Ramakrishna\'s heart overflowed with more and more love for his
disciple. He touched Narendra\'s body and said, quoting from a song:

> *Do you feel that your pride is wounded?*
>
> *So be it, then; we too have our pride.*

Then the Master said to Narendra: \"As long as a man argues about God,
he has not realized Him. You two were arguing. I didn\'t like it.

\"How long does one hear noise and uproar in a house where a big feast
is being given? So long as the guests are not seated for the meal. As
soon as food is served and people begin to eat, three quarters of the
noise disappears. (All laugh.) When the dessert is served there is still
less noise. But when the guests eat the last course, buttermilk, then
one hears nothing but the sound \'soop, sup\'. When the meal is over,
the guests retire to sleep and all is quiet.

\"The nearer you approach to God, the less you reason and argue. When
you attain Him, then all sounds-all reasoning and disputing-come to an
end. Then you go into samādhi-sleep-, into communion with God in
silence.\"

The Master gently stroked Narendra\'s body and affectionately touched
his chin, uttering sweetly the holy words, \"Hari Om! Hari Om! Hari
Om!\" He was fast becoming unconscious of the outer world. His hand was
on Narendra\'s foot. Still in that mood he gently stroked Narendra\'s
body. Slowly a change came over his mind. With folded hands he said to
Narendra: \"Sing a song, please; then I shall be all right. How else
shall I be able to stand on my own legs?\" Again he became speechless.
He sat motionless as a statue. Presently he became intoxicated with
divine love and said: \"O Radha, watch your step! Otherwise you may fall
into the Jamuna. Ah! How mad she is with love of Krishna!\"

The Master was in a rapturous mood. Quoting from a song, he said:

> *Tell me, friend, how far is the grove*
>
> *Where Krishna, my Beloved, dwells?*
>
> *His fragrance reaches me even here,*
>
> *But I am tired and can walk no farther.*

Then the Master completely forgot the outer world. He did not notice
anyone in the room, not even his beloved Narendra seated by his side. He
did not know where he himself was seated. He was totally merged in God.

Suddenly he stood up, shouting, \"Deep drunk with the Wine of Divine
Love!\" As he took his seat again, he muttered, \"I see a light coming,
but I know not whence it comes.\"

Now Narendra sang:

> *Lord, Thou hast lifted all my sorrow with the vision of Thy face,*
>
> *And the magic of Thy beauty has bewitched my mind;*
>
> *Beholding Thee, the seven worlds forget their never-ending woe;*
>
> *What shall I say, then, of myself, a poor and lowly soul? . . .*

Listening to the song, Sri Ramakrishna again went into deep samādhi. His
eyes were closed and his body was transfixed.

Coming down from the ecstatic mood he looked around and said, \"Who will
take me to the temple garden?\" He

appeared like a child who felt confused in the absence of his companion.

It was late in the evening. The night was dark. The devotees stood by
the carriage that had been brought to take the Master to Dakshineswar.
They helped him in gently, for he was still in deep ecstasy. The
carriage moved down the street and they looked after it with wistful
eyes. Soon the devotees turned homeward, a gentle south wind blowing in
their faces. Some were humming the lines of the song:

> *Lord, Thou hast lifted all my sorrow with the vision of Thy face, And
> the magic of Thy beauty has bewitched my mind.*

**April 6, 1885**

Sri Ramakrishna sat in the drawing-room of Balarām\'s house talking to
M. It was a very hot day and long past three o\'clock. He had come to
Calcutta to see some of his young disciples and also to visit
Devendra\'s house.

MASTER (to M.): \"I gave my word that I would be here at three o\'clock;
so I have come. But it is very hot.\"

1.  \"Yes, sir, you must have suffered very much.\" The devotees were
    fanning Sri Ramakrishna.

**About Puma**

MASTER: \"I have come here for Baburam and the younger Naren. Why
haven\'t you brought Purna?\"

1.  \"He doesn\'t like to come to a gathering of people. He is afraid
    you might praise him before others and his relatives might then hear
    about it.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, that\'s true. I won\'t do it in the future. Well, I
understand that you are giving Purna religious instruction. That is
fine.\"

M: \"As a matter of fact, the same thing is written in one of the
textbooks of the school. It says:

> *With all thy soul love God above;*
>
> *And as thyself thy neighbour love.*

If their guardians are displeased with such teachings, it can\'t be
helped.\"

MASTER: \"No doubt many things like that are written in those books; but
the authors themselves do not assimilate what they write. This power of
assimilation comes from associating with holy men. People listen to
instruction only when it is given by a sādhu who has truly renounced the
world; they are not much impressed by the writings or the words of a
mere scholar. Suppose a physician has a big jar of molasses by his side,
and he asks his patients not to eat molasses; the patients won\'t pay
much attention to his advice.

\"Well, how do you find Purna? Does he go into ecstatic moods?\"

1.  \"No, I haven\'t noticed in him any outer sign of such emotion. One
    day I told him those words of yours.\" MASTER: \"What words?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"You told us that if a man is a \'small receptacle\' he cannot
    control spiritual emotion; but if he is a \'large receptacle\' he
    experiences intense emotion without showing it outwardly. You said
    that a big lake does not become disturbed when an elephant enters
    it; but when the elephant enters a pool, one sees tremendous
    confusion and the water splashes on the banks.\"

MASTER: \"Purna will not show his emotion outwardly; he hasn\'t that
kind of temperament. His other signs are good. What do you say?\"

M: \"His eyes are very bright and prominent.\"

MASTER: \"Mere bright eyes are not enough. The eyes of a godly person
are different. Did you ask him what he felt after meeting me?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir, we talked about that. He has been telling me for the
    last four or five days that whenever he thinks of God or repeats His
    name, tears flow from his eyes and the hair on his body stands on
    end-such is his joy.\"

MASTER: \"Indeed! That\'s all he needs.\"

The Master and M: were silent a few moments. Then M. said, \"He is
waiting\"

MASTER: \"Who?\"

1.  \"Purna. Perhaps he has been standing at the door of his house. When
    any of us passes that way he will come running and salute us.\"

MASTER: \"Ah! Ah!\"

Sri Ramakrishna was resting, reclining against a bolster. M had brought
with him a twelve year-old boy who was a student in his school. His name
was Kshirode.

1.  \"He is a nice boy. He finds great joy in spiritual talk.\" MASTER
    (smiling): \"He has eyes like a deer\'s.\"

The boy saluted Sri Ramakrishna, touching his feet. Then he gently
stroked the Master\'s feet.

MASTER (to M.): \"Rākhāl is staying at home now; he has an abscess and
is not well. I understand that his wife expects a baby.\"

Paltu and Binode were seated in front of Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER (to Paltu, smiling): \"What did you say to your father? (To M.)He
answered back when his father told him not to come here. (To Paltu) What
did you say?\"

PALTU: \"I said to him: \'Yes, I go to him. Is that wrong?\' (The Master
and M. laugh.) I shall say more if necessary.\"

MASTER (to M., smiling): \"No, no! Should he go so far?\"

M: \"No, sir, he should not go too far.\" (Sri Ramakrishna laughs.)

MASTER (to Binode): \"How are you? Why haven\'t you come to
Dakshineswar?\"

BINODE: \"I almost came, but then I was afraid of falling ill again. I
have been ill and am not doing well.\"

MASTER: \"Come to Dakshineswar with me. The air is very good there. You
will recover.\"

The younger Naren entered the room. Sri Ramakrishna was going out to
wash his hands and face. The younger Naren followed him with a towel; he
wanted to pour water for the Master. M was with them.

MASTER: \"It\'s very hot today.\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"How do you live in that small room of yours? Doesn\'t it get
very hot on the upper floor?\"

M: \"Yes, sir, it gets very hot.\"

MASTER: \"Besides, your wife has been suffering from brain trouble. You
should keep her in a cool room.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. I have asked her to sleep downstairs.\"

Sri Ramakrishna returned to the drawing-room and took his seat.

MASTER (to M.): \"Why didn\'t you come to Dakshineswar last Sunday?\"

M: \"Sir, there was no one else at home. My wife was not well and no one
was there to look after her.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was on his way in a carriage to Devendra\'s house in
Nimu Goswami\'s Lane. The younger Naren, M, and one or two other
devotees were with him. The Master felt great yearning for Purna. He
began to talk of the young disciple.

MASTER (to M.): \"A great soul! Or how could he make me do japa for his
welfare? But Purna doesn\'t know anything about it.\"

M and the other devotees were amazed at these words.

MASTER: \"It would have been nice if you had brought him here with you
today. Why didn\'t you?\"

Seeing the younger Naren laugh, the Master and the other devotees
laughed too. The Master said to M., laughing and pointing to Naren:
\"Look at him! Look! How naive he looks when he laughs, as if he knew
nothing. He never thinks of these three things: land, wife, and money.
God cannot be realized unless the mind is totally free from \'woman and
gold\'.\"

**Master at Devendra\'s house**

The carriage proceeded to Devendra\'s house. Once Sri Ramakrishna had
said to Devendra at Dakshineswar, \"I have been thinking of visiting
your house one day.\" Devendra had replied: \"The same idea came to my
mind today, and I have come here to ask that favour of you. You must
grace my house this Sunday.\" \"But\", the Master had said, you have a
small income. Don\'t invite many people. The carriage hire will also run
to a big amount.\" Devendra had answered, laughing: \"What if my income
is small? \'One can run into debt to eat butter!\' \"At these words Sri
Ramakrishna had laughed a long time.

Soon the carriage reached Devendra\'s house. Sri Ramakrishna said to
him: \"Devendra, don\'t make elaborate arrangements for my meal.
Something very simple will do. I am not very well today.\"

Sri Ramakrishna seated himself in the drawing-room on the ground floor
of Devendra\'s house. The devotees sat around him. It was evening. The
room was well lighted. The younger Naren, Ram, M., Girish, Devendra,
Akshay, Upendra, and some other devotees were present. As the Master
cast his glance on a young devotee, his face beamed with joy. Pointing
to the devotee, Sri Ramakrishna said to the others: \"He is totally free
from attachment to land, wife, and money, the three things that entangle
one in worldliness. The mind that dwells on these three cannot be fixed
on God. He saw a vision, too. (To the devotee) Tell us, what did you
see?\"

DEVOTEE (laughing): \"I saw a heap of dung. Some were seated on it, and
some sat at a distance.\"

MASTER: \"It was a vision of the plight of the worldly people who are
forgetful of God. It shows that all these desires are disappearing from
his mind. Need one worry about anything if one\'s mind is detached from
\'woman and gold\'? How strange! Only after much meditation and japa
could I get rid of these desires; and how quickly he could banish them
from his mind! Is it an easy matter to get rid of lust? I myself felt a
queer sensation in my heart six months after I had begun my spiritual
practice. Then I threw myself on the ground under a tree

and wept bitterly. I said to the Divine Mother, \'Mother, if it comes to
that, I shall certainly cut my throat with a knife!\'

(To the devotees) \"If the mind is free from \'woman and gold\', then
what else can obstruct a man? He enjoys then only the Bliss of
Brahman.\"

Śaśi had recently been visiting Sri Ramakrishna. He was studying at the
Vidyāsāgar College for his Bachelor\'s degree. The Master began to talk
about him.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"That boy will think of money for some time.
But there are some who will never do so. Some of the youngsters will not
marry.\"

The devotees listened silently to the Master.

MASTER : \"It is hard to recognize an Incarnation of God unless the mind
is totally free from \'woman and gold\'. A man asked a. seller of
egg-plants the value of a diamond. He said, \'I can give nine seers of
egg-plants in exchange, and not one more.\'\"

At these words all the devotees laughed. The younger Naren laughed very
loudly. Sri Ramakrishna noticed that he had quickly understood the
implication of these words.

MASTER: \"What a subtle mind he has! Nangta also could understand things
that way, in a flash-the meaning of the Gitā, the Bhagavata, and other
scriptures.

**Master praises renunciation**

\"Renunciation of \'woman and gold\' from boyhood! Amazing indeed! It
falls to the lot of a very few. A person without such renunciation is
like a mango struck by a hail-stone. The fruit cannot be offered to the
Deity, and even a man hesitates to eat it.

\"There are people who during their youth committed many sins, but in
old age chant the name of God. Well, that is better than nothing.

\"The mother of a certain Mallick, who belonged to a very noble family,
asked me if prostitutes would ever be saved. She herself had led that
kind of life; that is why she asked the question. I said: \'Yes, they
too will be saved, if only they cry to God with a yearning heart and
promise not to repeat their sins.\' What will the mere chanting of
Hari\'s name accomplish? One must weep sincerely.\"

The kirtan began to the accompaniment of drums and cymbals. The singer
was a professional. He sang about

Sri Gaurānga\'s initiation as a monk by Keshab Bharati:

> *Oh, what a vision I have beheld in Keshab Bharati\'s hut!*
>
> *Gora, in all his matchless grace,*
>
> *Shedding tears in a thousand streams! . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna went into ecstasy when he heard the song. The musician
sang again, describing the suffering of a milkmaid of Vrindāvan at her
separation from Sri Krishna. She was seeking her Krishna in the madhavi
bower:

> *O madhavi, give me back my Sweet One!*
>
> *Give me, give me back my Sweet One!*
>
> *Give Him back, for He is mine,*
>
> *And make me your slave for ever.*
>
> *He is my life, as water is to the fish;*
>
> *O madhavi, you have hidden Him in your bosom!*
>
> *I am a simple, guileless girl,*
>
> *And you have stolen my Beloved.*
>
> *O madhavi, I die for my Sweet One;*
>
> *I cannot bear to live without Him.*
>
> *Without my Madhava I shall die;*
>
> *Oh, give Him, give Him back to me!*

Now and then Sri Ramakrishna sang with the musicians, improvising Lines:

> *How far from here is Mathura,*
>
> *Where dwells the Beloved of my soul?*

Sri Ramakrishna went into samādhi. His body was motionless. He remained
in that state a long time.

Gradually he came down to the consciousness of the outer world. Still in
a spiritual mood, he began to talk, sometimes addressing the devotees,
some-times the Divine Mother.

MASTER: \"Mother, please attract him to Thee. I can\'t worry about him
any more. (To M.) My mind is inclined a little to your brother-in-law.

**About Girish**

(To Girish) \"You utter many abusive and vulgar words; but that doesn\'t
matter. It is better for these things to come out. There are some people
who fall ill on account of blood-poisoning; the more the poisoned blood
finds an outlet, the better it is for them. At the time when the
*Upādhi* of a man is being destroyed, it makes a loud noise, as it were.
Wood crackles when it burns; there is no more noise when the burning is
over.

\"You will be purer day by day. You will improve very much day by day.
People will marvel at you.

\"I may not come many more times; but that doesn\'t matter. You will
succeed by yourself.\"

The Master\'s spiritual mood became very intense. Again he talked to the
Divine Mother.

MASTER: \"Mother, what credit is there in making a man good who is
already good? O Mother, what wilt Thou accomplish by killing one who is
already dead? Only if Thou canst kill a person who is still standing
erect wilt Thou show Thy glory.\"

Sri Ramakrishna remained silent a few moments. Suddenly he said in a
slightly raised voice: \"I have come from Dakshineswar. I am going,
Mother!\" It was as if a child had heard the call of its mother from a
distance and was responding to it. He again became motionless, absorbed
in samādhi. The devotees looked at him with un-winking eyes. Still in an
ecstatic mood he said, \"I shall not eat any more luchi.\" At this point
a few Vaishnava priests, who had come from the neighbourhood, left the
place.

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk with his devotees in a very joyous spirit.
It was the month of April and the day was very sultry. Devendra had made
ice-cream. He offered it to the Master and the devotees. M said in a low
voice, \"Encore! Encore!\" The devotees laughed. At the sight of the
ice-cream.

Sri Ramakrishna was happy as a child.

MASTER: \"The kirtan was very nice. The song described beautifully the
gopis\' state of mind: \'O madhavi, give me back my Sweet One!\' The
milkmaids of Vrindāvan were drunk with ecstatic love for Krishna. How
wonderful! Mad for Krishna!\"

A devotee, pointing to another devotee, said, \"He has the attitude of
the gopis.\"

RAM: \"No, he has both-the attitude of tender love and the attitude of
austere knowledge.\"

MASTER: \"What is it you are talking about?\"

Sri Ramakrishna inquired about Surendra.

RAM: \"I sent him word, but he hasn\'t come.\"

MASTER: \"He gets very tired from his heavy office-work.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Ram Babu has been writing about you.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"What is he writing?\"

DEVOTEE: \"He is writing an article on The Bhakti of the
Paramahamsa\'.\"

MASTER: \"Good! That will make Ram famous.\"

GIRISH (smiling): \"He says he is your disciple.\"

MASTER: \"I have no disciple. I am the servant of the servant of Rāma.\"
Some people of the neighbourhood had dropped in; but they did not please
the Master. He said: \"What sort of place is this? I don\'t find a
single pious soul here.\"

Devendra took Sri Ramakrishna into the inner apartments and offered him
refreshments. Afterwards the Master returned to the drawing-room with a
happy face and took his seat. The devotees sat around him\'. Upendra and
Akshay sat on either side of him and stroked his feet. The Master spoke
highly of the women of Devendra\'s family, saying: \"They are very nice.
They come from the country; so they are very pious.\"

The Master was absorbed in his own joy. In a happy mood he began to
sing:

Unless a man is simple, he cannot recognize God, the Simple One. . .

Again he sang:

> *Stay your step, O wandering monk*
>
> *Stand there with begging-bowl in hand,*
>
> *And let me behold your radiant face . . .*
>
> *Once more:*
>
> *A mendicant has come to us, ever absorbed in divine moods; Holy alike
> is he to Hindu and Musslman . . ..*

Girish saluted the Master and took his leave. Devendra and the other
devotees took the Master to his carriage. Seeing that one of his
neighbours was sound asleep on a bench in the courtyard, Devendra woke
him up. The neighbour rubbed his eyes and said, \"Has the Paramahamsa
come?\" All burst into laughter. The man had come a long time before Sri
Ramakrishna\'s arrival, and because of the heat had spread a mat on the
bench, lain down, and gone sound asleep.

Sri Ramakrishna\'s carriage proceeded to Dakshineswar. He said to M.
happily, \"I have eaten a good deal of ice-cream; bring four or five
cones for me when you come to Dakshineswar.\" Continuing, he said, \"Now
my mind is drawn to these few youngsters: the younger Naren, Purna, and
your brother-in-law.\"

M: \"Do you mean Dwija?\"

MASTER: \"No, he is all right; I mean his elder brother.\"

The carriage rolled on to the Kāli temple at Dakshineswar.

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 39**

THE MASTER\'S REMINISCENCES

> April 12, 1885

**Master\'s own reminiscences**

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting with the devotees in Balarām\'s drawing room
in Calcutta. M. arrived at three o\'clock. Girish, Balarām, the younger
Naren, Paltu, Dwija, Purna, Mahendra Mukherji, and many other devotees
were there. Shortly Trailokya Sannyal, Jaygopal Sen, and other members
of the Brahmo Samaj arrived. Many woman devotees were present also,
seated behind a screen. Among them was Mohini\'s wife, who had almost
gone insane on account of her son\'s death. There were a few other
afflicted souls like her who used to visit the Master to obtain peace of
mind.

Sri Ramakrishna was describing to the devotees the various incidents of
his *sādhanā* and the phases of his spiritual realization.

**Various forms of his meditation**

MASTER: \"During my *sādhanā*, when I meditated, I would actually see a
person sitting neat me with a trident in his hand. He would threaten to
strike me with the weapon unless I fixed my mind on the Lotus Feet of
God, warning me that it would pierce my breast if my mind strayed from
God.

\"The Divine Mother would put me in such a state that sometimes my mind
would come down from the Nitya to the Lila, and sometimes go up from the
Lila to the Nitya.

\"Sometimes, when the mind descended to the Lila, I would meditate day
and night on Sita and Rāma. At those times I would constantly behold the
forms of Sita and Rāma. Rāmlāla was my constant companion. Sometimes I
would bathe Him and sometimes feed Him.

\"Again, I used to be absorbed in the ideal of Radha and Krishna and
would constantly see their forms. Or again, I would be absorbed in
Gaurānga. He is the harmonization of two ideals: the Purusha and the
Prakriti. At such times I would always see the form of Gaurānga.

**Master\'s meditation on formless Spirit**

\"Then a change came over me. The mind left the plane of the Lila and
ascended to the Nitya. I found no distinction between the sacred tulsi
and the ordinary sajina plant. I no longer enjoyed seeing the forms of
God; I said to myself, \'They come and go.\' I lifted my mind above
them. I removed all the pictures of gods and goddesses from my room and
began to meditate on the Primal Purusha, the Indivisible Satchidananda,
regarding myself as His handmaid.

**Three kinds of *sādhanā***

\"I practised all sorts of *sādhanā*. There are three classes of
*sādhanā*: sattvic, rajasic, and tamasic. In the sattvic *sādhanā* the
devotee calls on the Lord with great longing or simply repeats His name;
he doesn\'t seek any result in return. The rajasic *sādhanā* prescribes
many rituals: purascharana, pilgrimage, panchatapa, worship with sixteen
articles, and so forth. The tamasic *sādhanā* is a worship of God with
the help of tamas. The attitude of a tamasic devotee is this: \'Hail,
Kāli! What? Wilt Thou not reveal Thyself to me? If not, I will cut my
throat with a knife!\' In this discipline one does not observe
conventional purity; it is like some of the disciplines prescribed by
the Tantra.

\"During my *sādhanā* period I had all kinds of amazing visions. I
distinctly perceived the communion of Ātman. A person exactly resembling
me entered my body and began to commune with each one of the six
lotuses. The petals of these lotuses had been closed; but as each of
them experienced the communion, the drooping flower bloomed and turned
itself upward. Thus blossomed forth the lotuses at the centres of
Muladhara, Svadhisthana, Anāhata, Visuddha, Ājnā, and Sahasrara. The
drooping flowers turned upward. I perceived all these things

directly.

\"When I meditated during my *sādhanā*, I used to think of the
unflickering flame of a lamp set in a windless place.

**Nature of deep concentration**

\"In deep meditation a man is not at all conscious of the outer world. A
hunter was aiming at a bird. A bridal procession passed along beside
him, with the groom\'s relatives and friends, music, carriages, and
horses. It took a long time for the procession to pass the hunter, but
he was not at all conscious of it. He did not know that the bridegroom
had gone by.

\"A man was angling in a lake all by himself. After a long while the
float began to move. Now and then its tip touched the water. The angler
was holding the rod tight in his hands, ready to pull it up, when a
passer-by stopped and said, \'Sir, can you tell me where Mr. Bannerji
lives?\' There was no reply from the angler, who was just on the point
of pulling up the rod. Again and again the stranger said to him in a
loud voice, \'Sir, can you tell me where Mr. Bannerji lives?\' But the
angler was unconscious of everything around him. His hands were
trembling, his eyes fixed on the float. The stranger was annoyed and
went on. When he had gone quite a way, the angler\'s float sank under
water and with one pull of the rod he landed the fish. He wiped the
sweat from his face with his towel and shouted after the stranger.
\'Hey!\' he said. \'Come here! Listen!\' But the man would not turn his
face. After much shouting, however, he came back and said to the angler,
\'Why are you shouting at me?\' \'What did you ask me about?\' said .the
angler. The stranger said, \'I repeated the question so many times and
now you art asking me to repeat it once more!\' The angler replied, \'At
that time my float was about to sink; so I didn\'t hear a word of what
you said.\'

**Single-mindedness in meditation**

\"A person can achieve such single-mindedness in meditation that he will
see nothing, hear nothing. He will not be conscious even of touch. A
snake may crawl over his body, but he will not know it. Neither of them
will be aware of the other.

\"In deep meditation the sense-organs stop functioning; the mind does
not look outward. It is like closing the gate of the outer court in a
house. There are five objects of the senses: form, taste, smell, touch,
and sound. They are all left outside.

\"At the beginning of meditation the objects of the senses appear before
the aspirant. But when the meditation becomes deep, they no longer
bother him. They are left outside. How many things I saw during
meditation! I vividly perceived before me a heap of rupees, a shawl, a
plate of sweets, and two women with rings in their noses. \'What do you
want?\' I asked my mind. \'Do you want to enjoy any of these things?\'
\'No,\' replied the mind, \'I don\'t want any of them. I don\'t want
anything but the Lotus Feet of God.\' I saw the inside and the outside
of the women, as one sees from out side the articles in a glass room. I
saw what is in them: entrails, blood, filth, worms, phlegm, and such
things.\"

Girish Chandra Ghosh used to say now and then that he could cure illness
by the strength of the Master\'s name.

**Occult powers**

MASTER (to Girish and the other devotees): \"People of small intellect
seek occult powers-powers to cure disease, win a lawsuit, walk on water,
and such things. But the genuine devotees of God don\'t want anything
except His Lotus Feet. One day Hriday said to me, \'Uncle, please ask
the Mother for some powers, some occult powers.\' I have the nature of a
child. While I was practising japa in the Kāli temple, I said to Kāli,
\'Mother, Hriday asked me to pray to You for some occult powers.\' The
Divine Mother at once showed me a vision. A middle-aged prostitute,
about forty years old, appeared and sat with her back to me. She had
large hips and wore a black-bordered sari. Soon she was covered with
filth. The Mother showed me that occult powers are as abominable as the
filth of that prostitute. Thereupon I went to Hriday and scolded him,
saying: \'why did you

teach me such a prayer? It is because of you that I had such an
experience.\'

**A false teacher**

\"People with a little occult power gain such things as name and fame.
Many of them want to follow the profession of guru, gain people\'s
recognition, and make disciples and devotees. Men say of such a guru:
\'Ah! He is having a wonderful time. How many people visit him! He has
many disciples and followers. His house is overflowing with furniture
and other things. People give him presents. He has such power that he
can feed many people if he so desires.\'

\"The profession of a teacher is like that of a prostitute. It is the
selling of oneself for the trifle of money, honour, and creature
comforts. For such insignificant things it is not good to prostitute the
body, mind, and soul, the means by which one can attain God. A man once
said about a certain woman: \'Ah! She is having a grand time now. She is
so well off! She has rented a room and furnished it with a couch, a mat,
pillows, and many other things. And how many people she controls! They
are always visiting her.\' In other words, the woman has now become a
prostitute. Therefore her happiness is unbounded. Formerly she was a
maidservant in a gentleman\'s house; now she is a prostitute. She has
ruined herself for a mere trifle.

**Master\'s visions during *sādhanā***

\"How many other visions I saw while meditating during my *sādhanā*!
Once I was meditating under the bel-tree when \'Sin\' appeared before me
and tempted me in various ways. He came to me in the form of an English
soldier. He wanted to give me wealth, honour, sex pleasure, various
occult powers, and such things. I began to pray to the Divine Mother.
Now I am telling you something very secret. The Mother appeared. I said
to Her, \'Kill him, Mother!\' I still remember that form of the Mother,
Her world bewitching beauty. She came to me taking the form of
Krishnamayi. But it was as if her glance moved the world.\"

Sri Ramakrishna became silent. Resuming his reminiscences, he said:
\"How many other visions I saw! But I am not permitted to tell them.
Someone is shutting my mouth, as it were. I used to find no distinction
between the sacred tulsi and the insignificant sajina leaf. The feeling
of distinction was entirely destroyed. Once I was meditating under the
banyan when I was shown a Musslman with a long beard. He came to me with
rice in an earthen plate. He fed some other Musslmans with the rice and
also gave me a few grains to eat. The Mother showed me that there exists
only One, and not two. It is Satchidananda alone that has taken all
these various forms; He alone has become the world and its living
beings. Again, it is He who has become food.

(To Girish, M., and the others) \"I have the nature of a child. Hriday
said to me, \'Uncle, ask the Mother for some occult powers.\' At once I
went to the temple to ask Her about them. At that time God had put me in
such a state that I had to listen to those who lived with me. I felt
like a child who sees darkness all around unless someone is with him. I
felt as if I should die unless Hriday was near me. You see I am in that
state of mind just now.While I am speaking to you my inner spirit is
being awakened.\"

As Sri Ramakrishna uttered these words, he was on the point of plunging
into samādhi and losing consciousness of time and space. But he was
trying with the utmost difficulty to control himself. He said to the
devotees in an ecstatic mood: \"I still see you. But I feel as if you
had been sitting here forever. I don\'t recall when you came or where
you are.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was silent a few minutes. Then, regaining partial
consciousness, he said, \"I shall have a drink of water.\" He often said
things like this after samādhi, in order to bring down his mind to the
ordinary plane of consciousness. Girish was a newcomer and did not know
this; so he started to bring some water. Sri Ramakrishna asked him not
to, saying, \"No, my dear sir, I cannot drink now.\"

The Master and the devotees were silent a while. Sri Ramakrishna resumed
the conversation.

MASTER: (to M.):\"Well,have I done any wrong in telling these secret
experiences?\"

M. did not know what to say and kept quiet.

MASTER: \"Why should there be any harm in it? I have told these things
to create faith in you all.\"

After a while he said to M. very humbly, \"Will you kindly bring him
here?\" He referred to Purna.

M. (hesitating): \"Yes, Sir. I shall send for him this very moment.

MASTER (eagerly): \"In Purna I have reached the \'post\'. Was Sri
Ramakrishna hinting that Purna was perhaps the last devotee of his inner
circle?

**Experience of mahabhava**

Sri Ramakrishna then described to Girish, M., and the other devotees his
own experience of mahabhava.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"My joy after that experience was equal to
the pain I suffered before it. Mahabhava is a divine ecstasy; it shakes
the body and mind to their very foundation. It is like a huge elephant
entering a small hut. The house shakes to its foundation. Perhaps it
falls to pieces.

\"The burning pain that one feels when one is separated from God is not
an ordinary feeling. It is said that the fire of this anguish in Rupa
and Sanatana scorched the leaves of the tree under which they sat. I was
unconscious three days in that state. I couldn\'t move. I lay in one
place. When I regained consciousness, the Brahmani took me out for a
bath. But my skin couldn\'t bear the touch of her hand; so my body had
to be covered with a heavy sheet. Only then could she hold me with her
hand and lead me to the bathing-place. The earth that had stuck to my
body while I was lying on the ground had become baked.

\"In that state I felt as if a ploughshare were passing through my
back-bone. I cried out: \'Oh, I am dying! I am dying!\' But afterwards I
was filled with great joy.\"

The devotees listened breathlessly to these experiences of the Master.

MASTER (to Girish): \"But it isn\'t necessary for you to go so far. My
experiences are for others to refer to. You busy yourself with five
different things, but I have one ideal only. I do not enjoy anything but
God. This is what God has ordained for me. (Smiling) There are different
trees in the forest, some shooting up with one trunk and others
spreading out with five branches. (All smile.)

\"Yes, my experiences are for others to refer to. But you should live in
the world in a spirit of detachment. You will no doubt have dirt on your
body, but you must shake it off as the mudfish shakes off the mud. You
may swim in the black ocean of the world, but your body should not be
stained.\"

GIRISH (smiling): \"But you too had to marry.\" (Laughter.)

MASTER (smiling): \"Marriage is necessary for the sake of samskara. But
how could I lead a worldly life? So uncontrollable was my divine fervour
that every time the sacred thread was put around my neck it dropped off.
Some believe that Sukadeva also had to marry-for the sake of samskara.
They say he even had a daughter. (All laugh.)

**Power of \"woman and gold\"**

\"\'Woman and gold\' alone is the world. It makes one forget God.\"

GIRISH: \"But how can we get rid of \'woman and gold\'?\"

MASTER: \"Pray to God with a yearning heart. Pray to Him for
discrimination. \'God alone is real and all else illusory\'-this is
discrimination. One strains water through a fine sieve in order to
separate the dirt from it. The clear water goes through the sieve
leaving the dirt behind. Apply the sieve of discrimination to the world.
Live in the world after knowing God. Then it will be the world of vidyā.

\"Just see the bewitching power of women! I mean the women who are the
embodiment of avidyā, the power of delusion. They fool men, as it were.
They take away their inner substance. When I see a man and woman sitting
together, I say to myself, \'Alas, they are done for\' (Looking at M.)
Haru, such a nice boy, is possessed by a witch. People ask: \'Where is
Haru? Where is he?\' But where do you expect him to be? They all go to
the banyan and find him sitting quietly under it. He no longer has his
beauty, power, or joy. Ah! He is possessed by the witch that lives in
the banyan.

\"If a woman says to her husband, \'Go there\', he at once stands up,
ready to go. If she says, \'Sit down here\', immediately he sits down.

\"A job-seeker got tired of visiting the manager in an office. He
couldn\'t get the job. The manager said to him, \'There is no vacancy
now; but come and see me now and then.\' This went on for a long time,
and the candidate lost all hope. One day he told his tale of woe to a
friend. The friend said: \'How stupid you are! Why are you wearing away
the soles of your feet going to that fellow? You had better go to Golap.
You will get the job tomorrow.\' \'Is that so?\' said the candidate. \'I
am going right away.\' Golap was the manager\'s mistress. The candidate
called on her and said: \'Mother, I am in great distress. You must help
me out of it. I am the son of a poor brahmin. Where else shall I go for
help? Mother, I have been out of work many days. My children are about
to starve to death. I can get a job if you but say the word.\' Golap
said to him, \'Child, whom should I speak to?\' She said to herself:
\'Ah, the poor brahmin! He has been suffering too much.\' The candidate
said to her, \'I am sure to get the job if you just put in a word about
it to the manager.\' Golap said, \'I shall speak to him today and settle
the matter.\' The very next morning a man called on the candidate and
said, \'You are to work in the manager\'s office, beginning today.\' The
manager said to his English boss: \'This man is very competent. I have
appointed him. He will do credit to the firm.\'

\"All are deluded by \'woman and gold\'. But I do not care for it at
all. And I swear to you that I do not know anything but God.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, a new sect, named, \'Nava Hullol\', has been started.
Lalit Chatterji is one of the members.\"

MASTER: \"There are different views. All these views are but so many
paths to reach the same goal. But everyone believes that his view alone
is right, that his watch alone keeps correct time.\"

GIRISH (to M.): \"Do you remember what Pope says about it?

\'Tis with our judgments as our watches, none

Go just alike, yet each believes his own.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"What does it mean?\"

1.  \"Every one thinks that his own watch keeps the correct time. But
    different watches do not give the same time.\"

MASTER: \"But however wrong the watches may be, the Sun never makes a
mistake. One should check one\'s watch with the sun.\"

A DEVOTEE: Mr. X- tells lies.

**Efficacy of truthfulness**

MASTER: \"Truthfulness in speech is the *tapasya* of the Kaliyuga. It is
difficult to practise other austerities in this cycle. By adhering to
truth one attains God. Tulsidas said: \'Truthfulness, obedience to God,
and the regarding of others\' wives as one\'s mother, are the greatest
virtues. If one does not realize God by practising them, then Tulsi is a
liar.\'

\"Keshab Sen assumed his father\'s debts. Others would have repudiated
them. I visited Devendra\'s Samaj at

Jorashanko and found Keshab meditating on the dais. He was then a young
man. I said to Mathur Babu, \'Of all who are meditating here, this young
man\'s \"float\" alone has sunk under water. The \"fish\" is biting at
the hook.\'

\"There was a man-whom I shall not name-who for ten thousand rupees told
a lie in court. In order to win the lawsuit he made me give an offering
to the Divine Mother. He said to me, \'Father, please give this offering
to the Mother.\' Trusting him like a child, I gave the offering.\"

DEVOTEE: \"A nice man indeed!\"

MASTER: \"But he had such faith in me that he believed the Mother would
grant his prayer if I but made the offering.\"

Referring to Lalit Babu, Sri Ramakrishna said: \"Is it an easy matter to
get rid of pride? There are very few who are without pride. Balarām is
one of them. (Pointing to a devotee) And here is another. Other people
in their position would have swelled with pride. They would have parted
their hair and showed other traits of tamas. They would have been proud
of their learning. The \'fat brahmin\' \[referring to Prankrishna\]
still has a little of it.

To M.) Mahima Chakravarty has read many books, hasn\'t he?\"

M: \"Yes, sir, he has read a great deal.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"I wish he and Girish could meet. Then we could enjoy
a little discussion.\"

GIRISH (smiling): \"Doesn\'t he say that by means of *sādhanā* all
people can be like Sri Krishna?\"

MASTER: \"Not exactly that, but something like it.\"

DEVOTEE: \"Sir, can all be like Sri Krishna?\"

**Special traits of a Divine Incarnation**

MASTER: \"An Incarnation of God or one born with some of the
characteristics of an Incarnation is called an Isvarakoti. An ordinary
man is called a jiva or jivakoti. By dint of *sādhanā* a jivakoti can
realize God; but after samādhi he cannot come back to the plane of
relative consciousness.

\"The Isvarakoti is like the king\'s son. He has the keys to all the
rooms of the seven-storey palace; he can climb to all the seven floors
and come down at will. A jivakoti is like a petty officer. He can enter
some of the rooms of the palace; that is his limit.

\"Janaka was a Jnāni. He attained Knowledge by means of his *sādhanā*.
But Sukadeva was Knowledge itself.\"

GIRISH: \"Ah!\"

**Nārada and Sukadeva**

MASTER: \"Sukadeva did not attain Knowledge through *sādhanā*. Like
Sukadeva, Nārada also had the Knowledge of Brahman. But he retained
bhakti in order to teach people. Prahlada sometimes assumed the attitude
of \'I am He\', sometimes that of a servant of God, and sometimes that
of His child. Hanuman also was like that.

\"All may wish for such a lofty state, but all cannot attain it. Some
bamboos are hollower than others; some are more solid inside.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"You say that your spiritual experiences are for others to
refer to. Tell us what we should do.\"

**Master urges intense dispassion**

MASTER: \"If you want to realize God, then you must cultivate intense
dispassion. You must renounce

immediately what you feel to be standing in your way. You should not put
it off till the future. \'Woman and gold\' is the obstruction. The mind
must be withdrawn from it.

\"One must not be slow and lazy. A man was going to bathe; he had his
towel on his shoulder. His wife said to him: \'You are worthless. You
are getting old and still you cannot give up some of your habits. You
cannot live a single day without me. But look at that man! What a
renouncer he is!\'

\"HUSBAND: \'Why? What has he done?\'

\"WIFE: \'He has sixteen wives and he is renouncing them one by one. You
will never be able to renounce.\'

HUSBAND: \'Renouncing his wives one by one! You are crazy. He won\'t be
able to renounce. If a man wants to renounce, does he do it little by
little?\'

WIFE (smiling): \'Still he is better than you.\'

\"HUSBAND: \'You are silly; you don\'t understand. He cannot renounce.
But I can. See! Here I go!\' \"

The Master continued: \"That is called intense renunciation. No sooner
did the man discriminate than he renounced. He went away with the towel
on his shoulder. He didn\'t turn back to settle his worldly affairs. He
didn\'t even look back at his home.

\"He who wants to renounce needs great strength of mind. He must have a
dare-devil attitude like a dacoit\'s. Before looting a house, the
dacoits shout: \'Kill! Murder! Loot!\'

\"Cultivate devotion and love of God and so pass your days. What else
can you do? When Krishna went away, Yaśoda became insane with grief and
visited Radha. Radha was moved by her sorrow and appeared before her as
*Ādyāśakti*. She said, \'My child, ask a boon of Me.\' Yaśoda replied:
\'Mother, what else shall I ask of You? Bless me that I may serve
Krishna alone with my body, mind, and speech; that I may behold His
devotees with these eyes; that I may go with these feet to the place
where His divine sport is manifested; that I may serve Him and His
devotees with these hands; and that I may devote all my sense-organs to
His service alone.\' \"

As Sri Ramakrishna uttered these words, he was about to go into ecstasy.

Suddenly he exclaimed: \"Kāli, the Embodiment of Destruction! No,
Nityakali, my eternal Divine Mother\" With great difficulty he
restrained himself. He was starting to say more about Yaśoda, when
Mahendra Mukherji arrived.

**Advice to householders**

Mahendra and his younger brother, Priya, had been visiting the Master
for some time. Mahendra owned a flour-mill and other businesses. His
brother was an engineer. Both the brothers engaged people to manage
their affairs and therefore had considerable leisure. Mahendra was
thirty-six or thirty-seven and his brother two years younger. Besides
their country home at Kedeti, they had a house at Baghbazar, Calcutta. A
young devotee named Hari accompanied them on their visits to Sri
Ramakrishna. Hari was married but greatly devoted to the Master.
Mahendra and Hari had not visited Dakshineswar for a long time. They
saluted Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER: \"Hello! Why haven\'t you visited Dakshineswar for so long?\"

MAHENDRA: \"Sir, I have been away from Calcutta. I was at Kedeti.\"

MASTER: \"You have no children. You don\'t serve anybody. And still you
have no leisure! Goodness gracious!\"

The devotees remained silent. Mahendra was a little embarrassed.

MASTER (to Mahendra): \"Why am I saying all this to you? You are sincere
and generous. You have love for God.\"

MAHENDRA: \"You are saying these words for my good.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"You see, we don\'t take any collection during the
performance at our place. Jadu\'s mother says to me, \'Other sādhus
always ask for money, but you do not.\' Worldly people feel annoyed if
they have to spend money.

\"A theatrical performance was being given at a certain place. A man
felt a great desire to take a seat and see it. He peeped in and saw that
a collection was being taken from the audience. Quietly he slipped away.
Another performance was being given at some other place. He went there
and, inquiring, found that no collection would be taken. There was a
great rush of people. He elbowed his way through the crowd and reached
the center of the hall. There he picked out a nice seat for himself,
twirled his moustaches, and sat through the performance. (All laugh.)

\"You have no children to divert your mind. I know a deputy magistrate
who draws a salary of eight hundred rupees a month. He went to Keshab\'s
house to see a performance. I was there too. Rākhāl and a few other
devotees were with me and sat beside me. After a while Rākhāl went out
for a few minutes. The deputy magistrate came over and made his young
son take Rākhāl \'s seat. I said, \'He can\'t sit there.\' \'At that
time I was in such a state of mind that I had to do whatever the person
next to me would ask me to do; so I had seated Rākhāl beside me. As long
as the performance lasted the deputy did nothing but gibber with his
son. The rascal didn\'t look at the performance even once. I heard, too,
that he is a slave to his wife; he gets up and sits down as she tells
him to. And he didn\'t see the performance for that snub-nosed monkey of
a boy.

(To Mahendra) \"Do you practise meditation?\"

MAHENDRA: \"Yes, sir. A little.\"

MASTER: \"Come to Dakshineswar now and then.\"

MAHENDRA (smiling): \"Yes, sir. I will. You know where my knots and
twists are. You will straighten them out.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"First come to Dakshineswar; then I shall press your
limbs to see where your twists are. Why don\'t you come?\"

MAHENDRA: \"Because of the pressure of my duties. Besides, I have to go
to my country home now and then.\"

MASTER (to Mahendra, pointing his finger at the devotees): \"Have they
no homes or dwelling-places? Have they no duties? How is it that they
come?

(To Hari) \"Why haven\'t you come to Dakshineswar? Is your wife living
with you?\"

HARI: \"No, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Then why did you forget me?\"

HARI: \"I haven\'t been well, sir.\"

MASTER (to the devotees): \"He looks thin. He has no small measure of
bhakti. He is overflowing with it, but it is of a rather troublesome
nature.\" (Laughter.)

Sri Ramakrishna used to address a certain devotee\'s wife by the name of
\"Habi\'s mother\". Her brother, a college student aged about twenty,
was there. He stood up, ready to go and play cricket. His younger
brother,

named Dwija, was also a devotee of the Master. Both brothers left the
room. A few minutes later Dwija returned. The Master said, \"Why didn\'t
you go?\" A devotee answered: \"He wants to hear the music. Perhaps that
is why he has come back.\"

Trailokya, the Brahmo devotee, was to sing for the Master. Paltu
arrived. The Master said: \"Who is this? Ah! It is Paltu.\"

Purna, another young devotee, also arrived. It was with great difficulty
that Sri Ramakrishna had managed to have him come. His relatives
strongly objected to his visiting the Master. Purna was a student in the
fifth grade of the school where M. taught. The boy prostrated himself
before Sri Ramakrishna. The Master seated him by his side and was
talking to him in a low voice. M. alone was sitting near them. The other
devotees were talking about various things. Girish, sitting on the other
side of the room, was reading a life of Keshab.

MASTER (to Purna): \"Come nearer.\"

GIRISH(to M.): \"Who is this boy?\"

M. was afraid that others might notice the boy. This would make trouble
for him at home and M would be responsible for it.

M. (Sharply): \"Don\'t you see he is a boy?\"

GIRISH (smiling): \"I need no ghost to tell me that.\"

The Master and the boy were talking in low tones.

MASTER: \"Do you practise what I asked you to?\"

PURNA: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Do you dream? Do you dream of a flame? A lighted torch? A
married woman? A cremation ground? It is good to dream of these
things.\"

PURNA: \"I dreamt of you. You were seated and were telling me
something.\"

MASTER: \"What? Some instructions? Tell me some of it.\"

PURNA: \"I don\'t remember now.\"

MASTER: \"Never mind. But it is very good. You will make progress. You
feel attracted to me, don\'t you?\"

A few minutes later Sri Ramakrishna said to the boy, \"Won\'t you come
there?\" He meant Dakshineswar. \"I can\'t promise\", answered the boy.

MASTER: \"Why? Doesn\'t one of your relatives live there?\"

PURNA: \"Yes, sir. But it won\'t be very convenient for me to go.\"
Girish was reading a life of Keshab written by Trailokya of the Brahmo
Samaj. In it Trailokya said that at first Sri Ramakrishna had been very
much opposed to the world but that after meeting Keshab he had changed
his mind and had come to believe that, one could lead a spiritual life
in the world as well. Several devotees had told the Master about this.
They wanted to discuss it with Trailokya. Those passages in the book had
been read to the Master.

Noticing the book in Girish\'s hand, Sri Ramakrishna said to Girish, M.,
Ram, and the other devotees: \"Those people are busy with the world.
That is why they set such a high value on worldly life. They are drowned
in \'woman and gold\'. One doesn\'t talk that way after realizing God.
After enjoying divine bliss, one looks on the world as crow-droppings.
At the very outset I utterly renounced everything. Not only did I
renounce the

company of worldly people, but now and then the company of devotees as
well. I noticed that the devotees were dropping dead one by one, and
that made my heart writhe with pain. But now I keep one or two of them
with me.\"

Girish left for home, saying he would come back. Trailokya arrived with
Jaygopal Sen. They bowed before the Master and sat down. He inquired
about their health. The younger Naren entered the room and saluted Sri
Ramakrishna. The Master said to him, \"Why didn\'t you see me last
Saturday?\"

Trailokya was ready to sing.

MASTER: \"Ah! You sang that day about the Blissful Mother. How sweetly
you sang! Others\' songs seem insipid to me. That day I didn\'t enjoy
even Narendra\'s singing. Why don\'t you sing those same songs again?\"
Trailokya sang:

> *Victory to Gora, Sachi\'s son!*
>
> *Hail, Abode of every virtue,*
>
> *Touchstone of Love, Ocean of Bliss,*
>
> *Man\'s bewitcher, beauteous of form,*
>
> *Enchanting the eye like shining gold!*
>
> *His tender arms that reach to the knee,*
>
> *Graceful and long as lotus stalks,*
>
> *Are lovingly stretched to all mankind,*
>
> *His lotus face of matchless beauty*
>
> *Overflows with the nectar of Love;*
>
> *His cheeks are covered with curling hair!*
>
> *Alight with heavenly love, his beauty*
>
> *Charms the eye! Beaming with fervour,*
>
> *Radiant with Bliss, his body trembling*
>
> *With Hari\'s joy, Gaurānga the golden*
>
> *Dances like a mad elephant, shaking*
>
> *In all his limbs with the frenzy of love!*
>
> *Gaurānga, singer of Hari\'s glories,*
>
> *Prize of every sādhu\'s heart,*
>
> *Rarest of men, the Ocean of Love,*
>
> *Embraces the outcaste, calls him brother,*
>
> *Takes him in his arms in fervent love!*
>
> *He dances with both his arms upraised,*
>
> *And sings Hari\'s name; the tears are streaming*
>
> *Down his cheeks; he weeps, he cries,*
>
> *He trembles, roars, and rages, saying,*
>
> *\"Where is Hari, the Jewel of my heart?\"*
>
> *The hair on his limbs is standing on end,*
>
> *Like a kadamba flower is his body,*
>
> *Covered with dust he rolls on the ground.*
>
> *O Thou, the Abode of Hari\'s lila,*
>
> *Fountain-head of Love\'s elixir,*
>
> *Friend of the helpless, Glory of Banga,*
>
> *Hail Chaitanya, Thou who shinest*
>
> *Bright as the moon, in the bhakta\'s heart!*

Sri Ramakrishna left the room for a minute. The women devotees were
seated near the screen. They were eager to see Sri Ramakrishna.
Trailokya went on with his music.

Sri Ramakrishna entered the room again and said to Trailokya, \"Please
sing a little about the Blissful Mother.\"

Trailokya sang:

> *O Mother, how deep is Thy love for men!*
>
> *Mindful of it, I weep for joy. . . .*

Listening to the song, the younger Naren went into deep meditation. He
remained as still as a log. Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: \"Look at him.
He is totally unaware of the outer world.\" The song was over. At Sri
Ramakrishna\'s request, Trailokya sang:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason? . . .*
>
> *Ram asked him to sing about Hari.*

Trailokya sang:

> *Chant, O mind, the name of Hari,*
>
> *Sing aloud the name of Hari,*
>
> *Praise Lord Hari\'s name!*
>
> *And praising Hari\'s name, O mind,*
>
> *Cross the ocean of this world.*
>
> *Hari dwells in earth, in water,*
>
> *Hari dwells in fire and air;*
>
> *In sun and moon He dwells.*
>
> *Hari\'s ever living presence*
>
> *Fills the boundless universe.*

M. said in a low voice to Trailokya, \"Please- \'Gaur and Nitai, ye
blessed brothers\'.\"

Sri Ramakrishna, too, asked him to sing the song. Trailokya and the
devotees sang it in chorus, the Master joining them. When it was over,
the Master sang:

> *Behold, the two brothers have come, who weep while chanting Hari\'s
> name,*
>
> *The brothers who, in return for blows, offer to sinners Hari\'s
> love,*
>
> *Embracing everyone as brother, even the outcaste shunned by men.*
>
> *Behold, the two brothers have come, who once were Kanai and Balāi of
> Braja. . . .*
>
> *Sri Ramakrishna sang again:*
>
> *See how all Nadia is shaking*
>
> *Under the waves of Gaurānga\'s love! . . .*

Then:

> *Who are they that walk along, chanting Hari\'s name?*
>
> *O Madhai, go out and see!*
>
> *They seem to be Gaur and Nitai,*
>
> *With golden anklets on their lovely feet;*
>
> *Shaven of head and clad in rags,*
>
> *They reel like madmen as they go. . . .*

The younger Naren was about to leave.

MASTER: \"Show great devotion to your parents; but don\'t obey them if
they stand in your way to God. You

must gird your loins with great determination and say, \'This rogue of a
father!\'\"

NAREN: \"Truly, I have no fear.\"

Girish arrived. Sri Ramakrishna introduced him to Trailokya. He asked
them to talk to each other. A few minutes later the Master said, \"That
song again, please.\"

Trailokya sang:

> *Victory to Gora, Sachi\'s son!*
>
> *Hail, Abode of every virtue,*
>
> *Touchstone of Love, Ocean of Bliss,*
>
> *Man\'s bewitcher, beauteous of form,*
>
> *Enchanting the eye like shining gold! . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna went into samādhi. He stood up, totally unconscious of
the world.

Regaining partial consciousness, he begged Trailokya to sing \"Oh, what
a vision I have beheld\".

Trailokya sang:

> *Oh, what a vision I have beheld in Keshab Bharati\'s hut!*
>
> *Gora, in all his matchless grace*
>
> *Shedding tears in a thousand streams!*
>
> *Like a mad elephant*
>
> *He dances in ecstasy and sings,*
>
> *Drunk with an overwhelming love.*
>
> *Rolling flat upon the ground and swimming in his tears,*
>
> *He weeps and shouts Lord Hari\'s name,*
>
> *Piercing the very heavens with his cries,*
>
> *Loud as a lion\'s roar;*
>
> *Then most humbly he begs men\'s love,*
>
> *To feel himself the servant of God.*
>
> *Shorn of his locks, he has put on the yogi\'s ochre robe;*
>
> *Even the hardest heart must melt*
>
> *To see his pure and heavenly love.*
>
> *Smitten with man\'s deep woe,*
>
> *He has abandoned everything*
>
> *And pours out love unstintingly.*
>
> *Oh, would that Premdas were his slave and, passing from door to door,
> Might sing Gaurānga\'s endless praise!*

The music was over. It was about dusk. Sri Ramakrishna was surrounded by
the devotees.

MASTER (to Ram): \"There were no instruments to accompany the songs. The
singing creates an atmosphere when there is proper accompaniment.
(Smiling) Do you know how Balarām manages a festival? He is like a
miserly brahmin raising a cow. The cow must eat very little but give
milk in torrents. (All laugh.) Sing your own songs and beat your own
drums: that\'s Balarām\'s idea!\" (All laugh.)

**Discussion with Trailokya**

As evening came on, lamps were lighted in the drawing-room and on the
verandah. Sri Ramakrishna bowed to the Divine Mother and began to chant
the name of God. The devotees sat around and listened to his sweet
chanting. They wanted to discuss with Trailokya his remarks about the
Master\'s change of opinion on worldly life. Girish started the
discussion.

GIRISH (to Trailokya): \"You have written that, after coming in contact
with Keshab, Sri Ramakrishna changed his views about worldly life; but
it isn\'t true.\"

MASTER (to Trailokya and the other devotees): \"If a man enjoys the
Bliss of God, he doesn\'t enjoy the world. Having tasted divine bliss,
he finds the world insipid. If a man gets a shawl, he doesn\'t care for
broadcloth.\"

TRAILOKYA: \"I referred to those who wanted to lead a worldly life. I
didn\'t mean renouncers\"

**Divine bliss is the highest**

MASTER: \"What are you talking about? People talk about leading a
religious life in the world. But if they once taste the bliss of God
they will not enjoy anything else. Their attachment to worldly duties
declines. As their spiritual joy becomes deeper, they simply cannot
perform their worldly duties. More and more they seek that joy. Can
worldly pleasures and sex pleasures be compared to the bliss of God? If
a man once tastes that bliss he runs after it ever afterwards. It
matters very little to him then whether the world remains or disappears.

\"Though the chatak bird is about to die of a parched throat, and around
it there are seven oceans, rivers, and lakes overflowing with water,
still it will not touch that water. Its throat is cracking with thirst,
and still it will not drink that water. It looks up, mouth agape, for
the rain to fall when the star Svati is in the ascendant. \'To the
chatak bird all waters are mere dryness beside Swati water.\'

**Holding to both God and the world**

\"People say they will hold to both God and the world. After drinking an
ounce of wine, a man may be pleasantly intoxicated and also conscious of
the world; but can he be both when he has drunk a great deal more?\"

After the bliss of God nothing else tastes good. Then talk about \'woman
and gold\' stabs the heart, as it were. (Intoning) \'I cannot enjoy the
talk of worldly people.\' When a man becomes mad for God, he doesn\'t
enjoy money or such things.\"

TRAILOKYA: \"But, sir, if a man is to remain in the world, he needs
money and he must also save. He has to give in charity and-\"

**Worldly man\'s charity**

MASTER: \"What? Do you mean that one must first save money and then seek
God? And you talk about charity and kindness! A worldly man spends
thousands of rupees for his daughter\'s marriage. Yet, all the while,
his neighbours are dying of starvation; and he finds it hard to give
them two morsels of rice; he calculates a thousand times before giving
them even that much. The People around him have nothing to eat; but what
does he care about that? He says to himself: \'What can I do? Let the
rascals live or die. All I care about is that the members of my family
should live well.\' And they talk about doing good to others!\"

TRAILOKYA: \"But, sir, there are good people in the world as well. Take
the case of Pundarika Vidyanidhi, the devotee of Chaitanya. He lived in
the world.\"

MASTER: \"He had drunk wine up to his neck. If he had drunk a little
more, he couldn\'t have led a worldly life.\"

Trailokya remained silent. M said aside to Girish, \'Then what he has
written is not true.\"

GIRISH (to Trailokya): \"Then what you have written is not true.\"

TRAILOKYA: \"Why so? Doesn\'t he \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\] admit that
a man can lead a spiritual life in the world?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, he can. But such a man should first of all attain
Knowledge and then live in the world. First he should realize God. Then
\'he can swim in a sea of slander and not be stained.\' After realizing
God, a man can

live in the world like a mudfish. The world he lives in after attaining
God is the world of vidyā. In it he sees neither woman nor gold. He
finds there only devotion, devotee, and God. You see, I too have a wife,
and \'a few pots and pans in my room; I too feed a few vagabonds; I too
worry about the devotees-Habi\'s mother for instance-when they come
here.\"

A DEVOTEE (to Trailokya): \"I have read in your book that you do not
believe in the Incarnation of God. You said so in connection with
Chaitanya.\"

TRAlLOKYA: \"Why, Chaitanya himself protested against the idea of Divine
Incarnation. Once, in Puri, Advaita and the other devotees sang a song
to the effect that Chaitanya was God. At this Chaitanya shut the door of
his room. Infinite are the glories of God. As he \[meaning Sri
Ramakrishna\] says, the devotee is the parlour of God. Suppose a parlour
is very well furnished; does that mean that the master of the house has
exhausted all his power and splendour in that one parlour?\"

GIRISH: \"He \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\] says that prema alone is the
essence of God; we need the man through whom this ecstatic love of God
flows. He says that the milk of the cow flows through the udder; we need
the udder; we do not care for the other parts of the cow-the legs, tail,
or horns.\"

TRAILOKYA: \"The milk of God\'s prema flows through an infinite number
of channels. God has infinite powers.\"

GIRISH: \"But what other power can stand before prema?\"

TRAILOKYA: \"It is possible if He who has the power wants it. Everything
is in God\'s power.\"

GIRISH: \"Yes, I admit that. But there is also a thing called the power
of avidyā.\"

TRAILOKYA: \"Is avidyā a thing? Does there exist a substance called
avidyā? It is only a negation, as darkness is the negation of light.
There is no doubt that we prize prema most: what is a drop to God is an
ocean to us. But if you say that prema is the last word about God, then
you limit God Himself.\"

MASTER (to Trailokya and the other devotees): \"Yes, yes, that is true.
But an ounce of wine makes me drunk. What need have I to count the
gallons of wine in the tavern? What need have we to know about the
infinite powers of God?\"

GIRISH (to Trailokya): \"Do you believe in the Incarnation of God?\"

TRAILOKYA: \"God incarnates Himself through His devotees alone. There
cannot be a manifestation of infinite powers. It simply isn\'t possible.
It is impossible for any man to manifest infinite powers.\"

GIRISH: \"You can serve your children as \'Brahma Gopala\'. Then why
isn\'t it possible to worship a great soul as God?\"

MASTER (to Trailokya): \"Why all this bother about infinity? If I want
to touch you, must I touch your entire body? If you want to bathe in the
Ganges, must you touch the whole river from Hardwar down to the ocean?

1.  \'All troubles come to an end when the ego dies.\' As long as a
    trace of \'I-consciousness\' remains, one is conscious of
    difference. Nobody knows what remains after the \'I\' disappears.
    Nobody can express it in words. That which is remains. After the
    \'I\' disappears one cannot say that a part manifests through this
    man and the rest through another. Satchidananda is the ocean. The
    pot of \'I\' is immersed in it. As long as the pot exists, the water
    seems to be divided into two parts: one part inside the pot and the
    other part outside it. But when the pot is broken there is only one
    stretch of water. One cannot even say that. Who would say that?\"

After the discussion Sri Ramakrishna became engaged in pleasant
conversation with Trailokya.

MASTER: \"You are happy. Isn\'t that so?\"

TRAILOKYA: \"But I shall become my old self again as soon as I leave
this place. Here I feel very much the awakening of spiritual
consciousness.\"

MASTER: \"You don\'t have to be afraid of walking on thorns if you are
wearing shoes. You needn\'t be afraid of \'woman and gold\' if you know
that God alone is real and all else illusory.\"

It was about nine o\'clock in the evening. Balarām took Trailokya to
another room and gave him refreshments.

Sri Ramakrishna began to tell the devotees about Trailokya and people of
his views.

MASTER (to Girish, M., and the other devotees): \"Do you know what these
people are like? They are like a frog living in a well, who has never
seen the outside world. He knows only his well; so he will not believe
that there is such a thing as the world. Likewise, people talk so much
about the world because they have not known the joy or God.

(To Girish) \"Why do you argue with them so much? They busy themselves
with both-the world and God. One cannot understand the joy of God unless
one has tasted it. Can anybody explain sex pleasure to a five-year-old
boy? Worldly people talk about God only from hearsay. Children, hearing
their old aunts quarrelling among themselves, learn to say, \'There is
my God\', \'I swear by God.\'

\"But that doesn\'t matter. I don\'t blame such people. Can all
comprehend the Indivisible Satchidananda? Only twelve rishis could
recognize Ramachandra. All cannot recognize an Incarnation of God. Some
take him for an ordinary man, some for a holy person, and only a few
recognize him as an Incarnation.

\"One offers a price for an article according to one\'s capital. A rich
man said to his servant: \'Take this diamond to the market and let me
know how different people price it. Take it, first of all, to the
egg-plant seller.\' The servant took the diamond to the egg-plant
seller. He examined it, turning it over in the palm of his hand, and
said, \'Brother, I can give nine seers of egg-plants for it.\'
\'Friend,\' said the servant, \'a little more-say, ten seers.\' The
egg-plant seller replied: \'No, I have already quoted above the market
price. You may give it to me if that price suits you.\' The servant
laughed. He went back to his master and said: \'Sir, he would give me
only nine seers of egg-plants and not one more. He said he had offered
more than the market price.\' The master smiled and said: \'Now take it
to the cloth-dealer. The other man deals only in egg-plants. What does
he know about a diamond? The cloth-dealer has a little more capital. Let
us see how much he offers for it.\' The servant went to the cloth-dealer
and said: \'Will you buy this? How much will you pay for it?\' The
merchant said: \'Yes, it is a good thing. I can make a nice ornament out
of it. I will give you nine hundred rupees for it.\' \'Brother,\' said
the servant, \'offer a little more and I will sell it to you. Give me at
least a thousand rupees.\' The cloth-dealer said: \'Friend, don\'t press
me for more. I have offered more than the market price. I cannot give a
rupee more. Suit yourself.\' Laughing the servant returned to his master
and said: \'He won\'t give a rupee more than nine hundred. He too said
he had quoted above the market price.\' The master said with a laugh:
\'Now take it to a jeweller. Let us see what he has to say.\' The
servant went to a jeweller. The jeweller glanced at the diamond and said
at once, \'I will give you one hundred thousand rupees for it.\'

\"They talk of practising religion in the world. Suppose a man is shut
up in a room. All the doors and windows are closed. Only a little light
comes through a hole in the ceiling. Can he see the sun with that roof
over his head? And what will he do with only one ray of light? \'Woman
and gold\' is the roof. Can he see the sun unless he removes the roof?
Worldly people are shut up in a room, as it were.

**Discussion about Divine Incarnations**

\"The Incarnations of God belong to the class of the Isvarakotis. They
roam about in the open spaces. They are never imprisoned in the world,
never entangled by it. Their ego is not the \'thick ego\' of worldly
people. The ego, the \'I-consciousness\', of worldly people is like four
walls and a roof: the man inside them cannot see anything outside. The
ego of the Incarnations and other Isvarakotis is a \'thin ego\': through
it they have an uninterrupted vision of God. Take the case of a man who
stands by a wall on both sides of which there are meadows stretching to
infinity. If there is a hole in the wall, through it he can see
everything on the other

side. If the hole is a big one, he can even pass through it. The ego of
the Incarnations and other Isvarakotis is like the wall with a hole.
Though they remain on this side of the wall, still they can see the
endless meadow on the other side. That is to say, though they have a
human body, they are always united with God. Again, if they will, they
can pass through the big hole to the other side and remain in samādhi.
And if the hole is big enough, they can go through it and come back
again. That is to say, though established in samādhi, they can again
descend to the worldly plane.\"

The devotees listened breathlessly to these words about the mystery of
Divine Incarnation.

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 40**

THE MASTER AT THE HOUSES OF BALARĀM AND GIRISH

> Friday, April 24, 1885

**Master and M.**

ABOUT ONE O\'CLOCK in the afternoon M. arrived at Balarām\'s house in
Calcutta and found the Master asleep in the drawing-room, one or two
devotees resting near him. M began to fan the Master gently. A few
minutes later Sri Ramakrishna woke up and sat on the bed with his
clothes in a rather untidy condition. M saluted him and took the dust of
his feet.

MASTER (tenderly to M.): \"Are you well? I\'m feeling rather uneasy. I
have a sore in my throat. I suffer very much during the early hours of
the morning. Can you tell me how I may be cured? (In a worried tone)
They served pickled mango with the meal. I ate a little of it.

\"How is your wife? I noticed the other day that she was looking rather
sickly. Give her soothing drinks to keep her nerves cool.\"

M: \"Green coconut milk, sir?\"

MASTER: \"Yes. A drink made of sugar candy is also good.\"

M: \"Since last Sunday I have been living at our house with my
parents.\"

MASTER: \"You have done well. It will be convenient for you to live at
home. Since your parents live there, you won\'t have to worry so much
about the family.\"

While Sri Ramakrishna was talking, his mouth became dry. He said to M.,
like a child: \"I feel a dryness in my mouth. Do you all feel that
way?\"

M. (to Jogin): \"Is your mouth also drying up?\"

JOGIN: \"No. Perhaps it is due to the heat.\"

Jogindra of Ariadaha was an intimate disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, and
later, after the passing away of the Master, renounced the world. Sri
Ramakrishna\'s clothes were still untidy. Some of the devotees smiled.

MASTER: \"I look like a mother nursing her babies. (All laugh.) Well, my
tongue is drying up. Shall I eat a pear or a jamrul?\"

BABURAM: \"Let me get a jamrul for you.\"

MASTER: \"You don\'t have to go out in this sun.\"

M was still fanning the Master.

MASTER: \"You may stop now. You have been fanning a long time.\"

1.  \"I am not tired, sir.\" MASTER (tenderly): \"No?\"

M taught in a school in the neighbourhood. He had a little recess at one
o\'clock, during which he visited Sri Ramakrishna. It was time for him
to go back to the school. He saluted the Master.

MASTER (to M.): \"Must you go now?\"

A DEVOTEE: \"School is not over yet. He came here during recess.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"He is like a mother with seven or eight children.
Day and night she is busy with her worldly duties. But now and then she
makes time to serve her husband.\"

M.\'s school closed at four o\'clock. He came back to Balarām\'s house
and found the Master sitting in the drawing room. The devotees were
arriving one by one. The younger Naren and Ram came. Narendra, too, was
there. M saluted the Master and took a seat, The ladies sent a plate of
halua for Sri Ramakrishna. Because of the sore in his throat he could
not eat any hard food.

MASTER (to Narendra): \"Ah! This is nice stuff! Eat some! It is good!
Eat some!\" (All laugh.)

Dusk was coming on. Sri Ramakrishna was about to go to the house of
Girish, who had arranged a festival to celebrate the Master\'s coming.
The Master came down from the second floor of Balarām\'s house with M.
and a few other devotees. Near the gate he saw a beggar chanting the
name of Rāma, and he stood still. He fell into a meditative mood and
remained standing a few minutes. He said to M., \"He sings well\" A
devotee gave the beggar four pice.

Sri Ramakrishna entered Bosepara Lane. Laughing, he said to M.: \"What
are these people saying? \'There comes Paramahamsa\'s battalion!\' What
these fools say!\" (All laugh.)

Sri Ramakrishna entered Girish\'s house. The latter had invited a large
number of devotees to join the festival. Many of them were present. They
all stood up to receive the Master, who, smiling, took his seat. The
devotees sat around him. Among them were Girish, Mahimacharan, Ram, and
Bhavanāth, and also Baburam, Narendra, Jogin, the younger Naren, Chuni,
Balarām, M., and the other devotees who had accompanied the Master from
Balarām\'s house.

MASTER (to Mahimacharan): \"I said to Girish about you, \'There is
one-very deep. You are only knee-deep.\' Now you must help me check up
on what I said. I want to see you two argue. But don\'t compromise.\"
(All laugh.)

Girish and Mahimacharan started their discussion. Soon Ram said: \"Let
them stop. Let us have some kirtan.\"

MASTER (to Ram): \"No, no! This has a great deal of meaning. They are
\'Englishmen\'. I want to hear what they say.\"

**Discussion about Divine Incarnation**

Mahimacharan contended that all could become Krishna by means of
*sādhanā*. Girish said that Sri Krishna was an Incarnation of God.
However much a man practised *sādhanā*, he could never be an
Incarnation.

MAHIMA: \"Do you know what I mean? Let me give an illustration. The
bel-tree can become a mango-tree if only the obstructions are removed.
It can be done by the practice of yoga.\"

GIRISH: \"You may say whatever you like, but it cannot be done either by
the practice of yoga or by anything else. Only a Krishna can become
Krishna. If anybody has all the attributes of another person, Radha for
instance, then he is none other than that person-Radha herself. If I see
in a person all the attributes of Krishna, then I shall conclude that I
am seeing Krishna Himself.\"

Mahimacharan could not argue well. At last he had to accept Girish\'s
views.

MAHIMA (to Girish): \"Yes, sir, both views are right. God has willed the
path of knowledge. He has also willed the path of bhakti. (Pointing to
Sri Ramakrishna) As he says, by different paths people ultimately reach
one and the same goal.\"

MASTER (aside to Mahima): \"You see, what I said was right, wasn\'t
it?\"

MAHIMA: \"Yes, sir. As you say, both paths are right.\"

MASTER (pointing to Girish): \"Haven\'t you noticed how deep his faith
is? He forgot to eat his refreshments. Like a dog, he would have tom
your throat if you hadn\'t accepted his view. But we have enjoyed the
discussion. You two have known each other and I myself have learnt many
things.\"

The musician arrived with his party and sat in the middle of the room.
He was waiting for a sign from Sri Ramakrishna to begin the kirtan. The
master gave his permission.

RAM (to the Master): \"Please tell them what to sing.\"

**Kirtan about Radha and Krishna**

MASTER: \"What shall I suggest? (After a little reflection) Well, let
them sing the prelude to the union of Radha and Krishna.\"

The musician sang:

> *My Gora, my treasure, the jewel among men,*
>
> *Weeps as he chants Sri Radha\'s name*
>
> *And rolls on the ground; with fervent love*
>
> *He chants her name again and again.*
>
> *The tears stream from his love-filled eyes;*
>
> *Once more he rolls upon the ground,*
>
> *As chanting her name he faints away.*
>
> *The hair on his body stands on end;*
>
> *His tongue can lisp but a single word.*
>
> *Says Basu: Why is Gora so restless?*

The kirtan continued. Radha had met Krishna on the bank of the Jamuna
under the kadamba tree. Her companions describe her physical and mental
condition:

> *A hundred times each hour, in and out of the room she goes;*
>
> *Restless, breathing hard, she looks toward the kadamba grove.*
>
> *Is she afraid of the elders? Has she been possessed by a ghost?*
>
> *Filled with restlessness, she cannot keep her dress arranged;*
>
> *Her jewels have fallen off; she trembles every now and then.*
>
> *Alas, she is so young! A princess born, and a wife besides!*
>
> *What is it that she craves? We do not understand her mind;*
>
> *But we can guess her hand is reaching out to catch the moon.*
>
> *Humbly says Chandidas: Radha has fallen in Krishna\'s trap.*

The kirtan went on. Radha\'s friends say to her.

> *Tell us, O Radha of comely face! Tell us what it is that ails you.*
>
> *Why has your mind wandered away? Why do you claw the earth in
> frenzy?*
>
> *Tell us why your golden skin has taken the ashy hue of cinders.*
>
> *From your body the scarlet cloth has dropped unheeded to the ground;*
>
> *Ah! Your eyes are red with tears; your lovely lotus face has
> withered.*
>
> *Tell us what it is that ails you, lest our hearts should break with
> grief.*

Radha says to her friends:

> *I long for the sight of Krishna\'s face.*

The musician sang again.

> *Hearing Krishna\'s flute, Radha has gone mad. She says to her
> friends:*
>
> *Who is the Sorcerer that dwells in the kadamba grove?*
>
> *His flute-notes suddenly enter my ears and strike a chord in my
> heart;*
>
> *Piercing my very soul, they slay my dharma and drive me mad.*
>
> *With restless mind and streaming eyes, alas! I can scarcely breathe:*
>
> *How He plays His magic flute, whose music thrills my soul!*
>
> *Because He is out of my sight, my heart expires; I cannot stay home.*
>
> *My soul yearns for Him; racked with pain, it longs to see Him once
> more.*
>
> *Says Uddhava Das: But you will die, O Radha, when you behold Him!*

The music continued. Radha\'s heart yearns for the vision of Krishna.
She says to her friends:

> *First I heard His magic flute from the kadamba grove,*
>
> *And the next day the minstrel told me of Him and thrilled my soul;
> Another day, O friend of my heart, you chanted His blessed name. (Ah,
> the blessed name of Krishna, full of honeyed sweetness!) The wise men,
> too, described to me His virtues without number.*
>
> *I am a weak and simple girl, and stern, alas! are my elders;*
>
> *My love for my Beloved grows; how can I live any longer?*
>
> *After reflecting long, I find that I must die at last:*
>
> *Can you not tell me a way, O friend, by which I may meet my Krishna?*

As Sri Ramakrishna heard the line, \"Ah, the blessed name of Krishna,
full of honeyed sweetness!\", he could not remain seated any longer. He
stood up in a state of unconsciousness and went into deep samādhi. The
younger Naren stood at his right. Regaining partial consciousness, the
Master repeated the name of Krishna in his melodious voice. Tears flowed
down his cheeks. He sat down again. The musician continued his singing.

Visakha, a friend of Radha, runs out and brings a portrait of Krishna.
She holds it before Radha\'s eyes. Radha says: \"I see the picture of
Him whom I beheld on the Jamuna\'s bank. Ever since then I have been in
this plight.

> *I see the picture of Him whom I beheld on the Jamuna\'s bank;*
>
> *The name Visakha spoke is the name of Him who is painted here.*
>
> *He who played on the flute is the Beloved of my soul;*
>
> *His virtues the minstrel sang to me; He has bewitched my heart. It is
> none other than He!\" So saying, Radha falls in a swoon. Restored to
> her senses by her friends, at once she says to them, \"Show me Him, O
> friends, whom I saw reflected in my soul.\" And they promise her that
> they will.*

Now Sri Ramakrishna with Narendra and the other devotees began to sing
the kirtan in a loud voice. They sang:

Behold, the two brothers have come, who weep while chanting Hari\'s
name. . . .

They continued:

> *See how all Nadia is shaking*
>
> *Under the waves of Gaurānga\'s love. . . .*

Again Sri Ramakrishna went into samādhi. After regaining consciousness
of the outer world, he returned to his seat. Turning to M., he said, \"I
don\'t remember which way I was facing before.\" Then he began to talk
to the devotees.

**About Hazra**

NARENDRA (to the Master): \"Hazra has now become a good man.\"

MASTER: \"You don\'t know. There are people who repeat Rāma\'s name with
their tongues but hide stones under their arms to throw at others.\"

NARENDRA: \"I don\'t agree with you, sir. I asked him about the things
people complain of. He denied them.\"

MASTER: \"He is steadfast in his devotions. He practises japa a little.
But he also behaves in a queer way. He doesn\'t pay the coachman his
fare.\"

NARENDRA: \"That isn\'t true, sir. He said he had paid it.\"

MASTER: \"Where did he get the money?\"

NARENDRA: \"From Ramlal or someone else.\"

MASTER: \"Did you ask him all these things in detail? Once I prayed to
the Divine Mother, \'O Mother, if Hazra is a hypocrite then please
remove him from here.\' Later on I told him of my prayer. After a few
days he came to me and said, \'You see, I am still here.\' (The Master
and the others laugh.) But soon afterwards he left.

\"Hazra\'s mother begged me through Ramlal to ask Hazra to come home.
She was almost blind with weeping. I tried in various ways to persuade
him to visit her. I said: \'Your mother is old. Go and see her once.\' I
couldn\'t make him go. Afterwards the poor mother died weeping for
him.\"

NARENDRA: \"This time he will go home.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, yes! He will go home! He is a rogue. He is a rascal. You
don\'t understand him. You are a fool. Gopal said that Hazra stayed at
Sinthi a few days. People used to supply him with butter, rice, and
other food. He had the impudence to tell them he couldn\'t swallow such
coarse rice and bad butter. Ishan of Bhatpara accompanied him there. He
ordered Ishan to carry water for him. That made the other brahmins very
angry.\"

NARENDRA: \"I asked him about that too. He said that Ishan Babu had
himself come forward with the water. Besides, many brahmins of Bhatpara
showed him respect.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"That was the result of his japa and austerity. You
see, physical traits to a great extent influence character. Short
stature and a body with dents here and there are not good traits. People
with such traits take a long time to acquire spiritual knowledge.\"

BHAVANĀTH: \"Let us stop talking about these things.\"

MASTER: \"Don\'t misunderstand me. (To Narendra) You say you understand
people; that is why I am telling you all this. Do you know how I look on
people like Hazra? I know that just as God takes the form of holy men,
so He also takes the form of cheats and rogues. (To Mahimacharan) What
do you say? All are God.\"

MAHIMA: \"Yes, sir. All are God.\"

GIRISH (to the Master): \"Sir, what is ekangi prema?\"

MASTER: \"It means one-sided love. For instance, the water does not seek
the duck, but the duck loves water.

There are other kinds of love: sadharani, samanjasa, and samartha. In
the first, which is ordinary love, the lover seeks his own happiness; he
doesn\'t care whether the other person is happy or not. That was
Chandravali\'s attitude toward Krishna. In the second, which is a
compromise, both seek each other\'s happiness. This is a noble kind of
love. But the third is the highest of all. Such a lover says to his
beloved, \'Be happy yourself, whatever may happen to me.\' Radha had
this highest love. She was happy in Krishna\'s happiness. The gopis,
too, had attained this exalted state.

\"Do you know who the gopis were? Ramachandra was wandering in the
forest where sixty thousand rishis dwelt. They were very eager to see
Him. He cast a tender glance at them. According to a certain Purana,
they were born later on as the gopis of Vrindāvan.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, who may be called an antaranga?\"

MASTER: \"Let me give an illustration. A natmandir has pillars inside
and outside. An antaranga is like the inside pillars. Those who always
live near the guru are the antarangas.

(To Mahimacharan) \"The Jnāni wants neither a form of God nor His
Incarnation. While wandering in the forest, Ramachandra saw a number of
rishis. They welcomed Him to their Āśrama with great love and said to
Him: \'O Rāma, today our life is blessed because we have seen You. But
we know You as the son of Daśaratha. Bharadvaja and other sages call You
a Divine Incarnation; but that is not our view. We meditate on the
Indivisible Satchidananda.\' Rāma was pleased with them and smiled.

**Master\'s exalted mood**

\"Ah, what a state of mind I passed through! My mind would lose itself
in the Indivisible Absolute. How many days I spent that way! I renounced
bhakti and bhakta, devotion and devotee. I became inert. I could not
feel the form of my own head. I was about to die. I thought of keeping
Ramlal\'s aunt near me.

\"I ordered the removal of all pictures and portraits from my room. When
I regained outer consciousness, when the mind climbed down to the
ordinary level, I felt as if I were being suffocated like a drowning
person. At last I said to myself, \'If I can\'t bear people, then how
shall I live?\' Then my mind was again directed to bhakti and bhakta.
\'What has happened to me?\' I kept asking people. Bholanath said to me,
\'This state of mind has been described in the Mahabharata.\' How can a
man live, on coming down from the plane of samādhi? Surely he requires
devotion to God and the company of devotees. Otherwise, how will he keep
his mind occupied?\"

MAHIMACHARAN (to the Master): \"Sir, can a man return from the plane of
samādhi to the plane of the ordinary world?\"

MASTER (in a low voice, to Mahima): \"I shall tell you privately. You
are the only one fit to hear it.

**Difference between a jiva and an Incarnation**

\"Koar Singh also asked me that question. You see, there is a vast
difference between the jiva and Isvara. Through worship and austerity, a
jiva can at the utmost attain samādhi; but he cannot come down from that
state. On the other hand, an Incarnation of God can come down from
samādhi. A jiva is like an officer of the king; he can go as far as the
outer court of the seven-storey palace. But the king\'s son has access
to all the seven floors; he can also go outside. Everybody says that no
one can return from the plane of samādhi. In that case, how do you
account for sages like Sankara and Ramanuja? They retained the \'ego of
Knowledge\'.\"

MAHIMA: \"That is true, indeed. Otherwise, how could they write books?\"

MASTER: \"Again, there are the instances of sages like Prahlada, Nārada,
and Hanuman. They too retained bhakti after attaining samādhi.\"

MAHIMA: \"That is true, sir.\"

**Divine knowledge destroys egotism**

MASTER: \"Some people indulge in philosophical speculation and think
much of themselves. Perhaps they have studied a little Vedānta. But a
man cannot be egotistic if he has true knowledge. In other words, in
samādhi man becomes one with God and gets rid of his egotism. True
knowledge is impossible without samādhi. In samādhi man becomes one with
God. Then he can have no egotism.

\"Do you know what it is like? Just at noon the sun is directly
overhead. If you look around, then, you do not see your shadow.
Likewise, you will not find the \'shadow\' of ego after attaining
Knowledge, samādhi.

**The ego after God-vision**

\"But if you see in anyone a trace of \'I-consciousness\' after the
attainment of true Knowledge, then know that it is either the \'ego of
Knowledge\' or the \'ego of Devotion\' or the \'servant ego\'. It is not
the \'ego of ignorance\'. \"Again, jnāna and bhakti are twin paths.
Whichever you follow, it is God that you will ultimately reach. The
Jnāni looks on God in one way and the bhakta looks on Him in another
way. The God of the Jnāni is full of brilliance, and the God of the
bhakta full of sweetness.\"

Bhavanāth was seated near the Master, listening to these words.

BHAVANĀTH (to the Master): \"Sir, I have a question to ask. I don\'t
quite understand the Chandi. It is written there that the Divine Mother
kill all beings. What does that mean?\"

MASTER: \"This is all Her lila, Her sportive pleasure. That question
used to bother me too. Later I found out that all is māyā. Both creation
and destruction are God\'s māyā.\"

Girish conducted Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees to the roof, where the
meal was served. There was a bright moon in the sky. The devotees took
their seats. The Master occupied a seat in front of them. All were in a
joyous mood.

Sri Ramakrishna was beside himself with joy at the sight of Narendra.
The beloved disciple sat in the front row. Every now and then the Master
asked how he was \'getting along. He had hardly finished half his meal
when he came to Narendra with some water-melon sherbet and curd from his
own plate. Tenderly he said to the disciple, \"Please eat this.\" Then
he went back to his own place.

**Saturday, May 9, 1885**

It was about three o\'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna sat in
Balarām\'s drawing-room in a happy mood. Many devotees were present.
Narendra, M., Bhavanāth, Purna, Paltu, the younger Naren, Girish, Ram,
Binode, Dwija, and others sat around him.Balarām was not there. He had
gone to Monghyr for a change of air. His eldest daughter had invited Sri
Ramakrishna and the devotees and celebrated the occasion with a feast.
The Master was resting after the meal.

Again and again the Master asked M.: \"Am I liberal-minded? Tell me.\"

BHAVANĀTH (smiling): \"Why do you ask him? He will only keep quiet.\" A
beggar entered the room. He wanted to sing. The devotees listened to a
song or two. Narendra liked his singing and asked him to sing more.

MASTER: \"Stop! Stop! We don\'t want any more songs. Where is the money?
(To Narendra) You may order the music, but who will pay?\"

A DEVOTEE (smiling): \"Sir, the beggar may think you are an amir, a
wealthy aristocrat, the way you are leaning against that big pillow
.(All laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): \"He may also think I am ill.\"

The conversation drifted to Hazra and his egotism. For some reason he
had had to go away from Dakshineswar.

NARENDRA: \"Hazra now admits he was egotistic.\"

MASTER: \"Don\'t believe him. He says so in order to come back to
Dakshineswar. (To the devotees) Narendra always insists that Hazra is a
grand person.\"

NARENDRA: \"Even now I say so.\"

MASTER: \"Why? You have heard so much about him, and still you think
so?\"

NARENDRA: \"He has slight defects but many virtues.\"

**Hazra\'s selfishness**

MASTER: \"I admit that he has devotion to his ideal. He said to me,
\'You don\'t care for me now, but later you will be seeking my
company.\' A goswami came from Srerampore. He was a descendant of
Advaita Goswami. He intended to spend a night or two at the temple
garden. I asked him very cordially to stay. Do you know what Hazra said
to me? He said, \'Send him to the temple officer.\' What was in his mind
was that the goswami might ask for milk or food, and that he might have
to give him some from his own share. I said to Hazra: \'Now, you rogue!
Even I prostrate myself before him because he is a goswami. And you,
after leading a worldly life and indulging a great deal in \"woman and
gold\", have so much pride because of a little japa! Aren\'t you ashamed
of yourself?\'

\"One realizes God through sattva. Rajas and tamas take one away from
Him. The scriptures describe sattva as white, rajas as red, and tamas as
black. Once I asked Hazra: Tell me what you think of the people that
come here. How much sattva does each one possess?\' He said, \'Narendra
has one hundred per cent and I have one hundred and ten per cent.\'
\'What about me?\' I asked. And he said: \'You still have a trace of
pink. You have only seventy five per cent, I should say.\' (All laugh.)

\"Hazra used to practise japa at Dakshineswar. While telling his beads,
he would also try to do a little brokerage business. He has a debt of a
few thousand rupees which he must clear up. About the brahmin cooks of
the temple he remarked, \'Do you think I talk with people of that
sort?\'

\"The truth is that you cannot attain God if you have even a trace of
desire. Subtle is the way of dharma. If you are trying to thread a
needle, you will not succeed if the thread has even a slight fibre
sticking out.

\"There are people who perform japa for thirty years and still do not
attain any result. Why? A gangrenous sore requires very drastic
treatment. Ordinary medicine won\'t cure it.

**God\'s grace**

\"No matter how much *sādhanā* you practise, you will not realize the
goal as long as you have desire. But this also is true, that one can
fealize the goal in a moment through the grace of God, through His
kindness. Take the case of a room that has been dark a thousand years.
If somebody suddenly brings a lamp into it, the room is lighted in an
instant.

\"Suppose a poor man\'s son has fallen into the good graces of a rich
person. He marries his daughter. Immediately he gets an equipage,
clothes, furniture, a house, and other things.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, how does one receive God\'s grace?\"

MASTER: \"God has the nature of a child. A child is sitting with gems in
the skirt of his cloth. Many a person passes by him along the road. Many
of them pray to him for gems. But he hides the gems with his hands and
says, turning away his face, \'No, I will not give any away.\' But
another man comes along. He doesn\'t ask for the gems, and yet the child
runs after him and offers him the gems, begging him to accept them.

\"One cannot realize God without renunciation. Who will accept my words?
I have been seeking a companion, a

sympathetic soul who will under-stand my feelings. When I see a great
devotee, I say to myself, \'Perhaps he will accept my ideal.\' But later
on I find that he behaves in a different way.

\"A ghost sought a companion. One becomes a ghost if one dies from an
accident on a Saturday or a Tuesday. So whenever the ghost found someone
who seemed to be dying from an accident on either of these days, he
would run to him. He would say to himself that at last he had found his
companion But no sooner would he run to the man than he would see the
man getting up. The man, perhaps, had fallen from a roof and after a few
moments regained consciousness.

\"Once Mathur Babu was in an ecstatic mood. He behaved like a drunkard
and could not look after his work. At this all said: \'Who will look
after his estate if he behaves like that? Certainly the young priest has
cast a spell upon him.\'

\"During one of Narendra\'s early visits I touched his chest and he
became unconscious. Regaining consciousness, he wept and said: \'Oh, why
did you do that to me? I have a father! I have a mother!\' This \'I\'
and \'mine\' spring from ignorance.

**Unreality of all worldly relationships**

\"A guru said to his disciple: \'The world is illusory. Come away with
me.\' \'But, revered sir,\' said the disciple, \'my people at home-my
father, my mother, my wife-love me so much. How can I give them up?\'
The guru said: No doubt you now have this feeling of \"I\" and \"mine\"
and say that they love you; but this is all an illusion of your mind. I
shall teach you a trick, and you will know whether they love you truly
or not.\' Saying this, the teacher gave the disciple a pill and said to
him: \'Swallow this at home. You will appear to be a corpse, but you
will not lose consciousness. You will see everything and hear
everything. Then I shall come to your house and gradually you will
regain your normal state.\'

\"The disciple followed the teacher\'s instructions and lay on his bed
like a dead person: The house was filled with loud wailing. His mother,
his wife, and the others lay on the ground weeping bitterly. Just then a
brahmin entered the house and said to them, \'What is the matter with
you?\' \'This boy is dead\', they replied. The brahmin felt his pulse
and said: \'How is that? No, he is not dead. I have a medicine for him
that will cure him completely.\' The joy of the relatives was unbounded;
it seemed to them that heaven itself had come down into their house.
\'But\', said the brahmin, \'I must tell you something else. Another
person must take some of this medicine first and then the boy must
swallow the rest. But the other person will die. I see he has so many
dear relatives here; one of them will certainly agree to take the
medicine. I see his wife and mother crying bitterly. Surely they will
not hesitate to take it.\'

\"At once the weeping stopped and all sat quiet. The mother said:
\'Well, this is a big family. Suppose I die; then who will look after
the family?\' She fell into a reflective mood. The wife, who had been
crying a minute before and bemoaning her ill luck, said: \'Well, he has
gone the way of mortals. I have these two or three young children. Who
will look after them if I die?\'

\"The disciple saw everything and heard everything. He stood up at once
and said to the teacher: \'Let us go, revered sir. I will follow you.\'
(All laugh.)

\"Another disciple said to his teacher: \'Revered sir, my wife takes
great care of me. It is for her sake that I cannot give up the world.\'
The disciple practised hathayoga. The teacher taught him, too, a trick
to test his wife\'s love. One day there was a great wailing in his
house. The neighbours came running and saw the hathayogi seated in a
posture, his limbs paralysed and distorted. They thought he was dead.
His wife fell on the ground, weeping piteously: \'Oh, what has befallen
me? How have you provided for our future? Oh, friends, I never dreamt I
should meet such a fate!\'

\"In the mean time the relatives and friends had brought a cot to take
the corpse out. But suddenly a difficulty arose as they started to move
it. Since the body was twisted and stiff, it could not be taken out
through the door. A neighbour quickly brought an axe and began to chop
away the door-frame. The wife was crying

bitterly, when she heard the sound of the axe. She ran to the door.
\'What are you doing, friends?\' she asked, still weeping. The neighbour
said, \'We can\'t take the body out; so we are chopping away the
door-frame.\'

1.  \'Please\', said the wife, \'don\'t do any such thing. I am a widow
    now; I have no one to look after me. I have to bring up these young
    children. If you destroy this door, I shall not be able to replace
    it. Friends, death is inevitable for all, and my husband cannot be
    called back to life. You had better cut his limbs.\' The hathayogi
    at once stood up. The effect of the medicine had worn off. He said
    to his wife: \' You evil one! You want to cut off my hands and feet,
    do you?\' So saying, he renounced home and followed his teacher.
    (All laugh.)

\"Many women make a show of grief. Knowing beforehand that they will
have to weep, they first take off their nose-rings and other ornaments,
put them securely in a box, and lock it. Then they fall on the ground
and weep, O friends, what has befallen us?\'\"

**Narendra\'s scepticism**

NARENDRA: \"How can I believe, without proof, that God incarnates Him
self as a man?\"

GIRISH: \"Faith alone is sufficient. What is the proof that these
objects exist here? Faith alone is the proof.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Have philosophers been able to prove that the external
world exists outside us? But they say we have an irresistible belief in
it.\"

GIRISH (to Narendra): \"You wouldn\'t believe, even if God appeared
before you. God Himself might say that He was God born as a man, but
perhaps you would say that He was a liar and a cheat.\"

The conversation turned to the immortality of the gods.

NARENDRA: \"What is the proof of their immortality?\"

GIRISH: \"You wouldn\'t believe it even if the gods appeared before
you.\"

NARENDRA: \"That the immortals existed in the past requires proof.\"

M whispered something to Paltu.

PALTU (smiling, to Narendra): \"What need is there for the immortals to
be without beginning? To be immortal one need only be without end.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Narendra is the son of a lawyer, but Paltu of a
deputy magistrate.\" (All laugh.)

All kept silent awhile.

JOGIN (smiling): \"He: \[meaning the Master\] doesn\'t accept
Narendra\'s words any more.\"

MASTER (smiling); \"One day I remarked that the chatak bird doesn\'t
drink any water except that which falls from the sky. Narendra said,
\'The chatak drinks ordinary water as well.\' Then I said to the Divine
Mother, \'Mother, then are my words untrue?\' I was greatly worried
about it. Another day, later on, Narendra was here. Several birds were
flying about in the room. He exclaimed, \'There! There!\' \'What is
there?\' I asked. He said, \'There is your chatak!\' I found they were
only bats. Since that day I don\'t accept what he says. (All laugh.)

\"At Jadu Mallick\'s garden house Narendra said to me, The forms of God
that you see are the fiction of your mind.\' I was amazed and said to
him, \'But they speak too! \'Narendra answered, \'Yes, one may think
so.\' I went to the temple and wept before the Mother. \'O Mother,\' I
said, \'what is this? Then is this all false? How could Narendra say
that?\' Instantly I had a revelation. I saw Consciousness-Indivisible
Consciousness-and a divine being formed of that Consciousness. The
divine form said to me, \'If your words are untrue, how is that they
tally with the facts? Thereupon I said to Narendra : \'You rogue! You
created unbelief in my mind. Don\'t

come here any more.\'

The discussion continued. Narendra was arguing. He was then slightly
Over twenty-two years of age.

Narendra (to Girish, M., and others): \" How am I to believe in the
Words of scripture? The Mahanirvana Tantra says, in one place, that
unless a man attains the Knowledge of Brahman he goes to hell; and the
same book says, in another place, that there is no salvation without the
worship of Parvathi, the Divine Mother. Manu writes about himself in the
Manusamhita; Moses describes his own death in Pentateuch.

\"The Samkhya philosophy says that God does not exit, because there is
no proof of His existence. Again, the same philosophy says that one must
accept the Vedas and that they are eternal.

\"But I don\'t say that these are not true. I simply don\'t understand
them. Please explain them to me. People have explained the scriptures
according to their fancy. Which explanation shall we accept? White light
coming through a red medium appears red, through a green medium,
green.\"

A DEVOTEE:\' \"The Gitā contains the words of God.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, the Gitā is the essence of all scriptures. A sannyāsi may
or may not keep with him another book, but he always carries a pocket
Gitā.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"The Gitā contains the words of Krishna.\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes, Krishna or any fellow for that matter!\"

Sri Ramakrishna was amazed at these words of Narendra.

MASTER: \"This is a fine discussion. There are two interpretations of
the scriptures: the literal and the real. \'One should accept the real
meaning alone-what agrees with the words of God. There is a vast
difference between the words written in a letter and the direct words of
its writer. The scriptures are like the words of the letter; the words
of God are direct words. I do not accept anything unless it agrees with
the direct words of the Divine Mother.\"

The conversation again turned to Divine Incarnation.

NARENDRA: \"It is enough to have faith in God. I don\'t care about what
He is doing or what He hangs from. Infinite is the universe; infinite
are the Incarnations.\"

As Sri Ramakrishna heard the words, \"Infinite is the universe; infinite
are the Incarnations\", he said with folded hands, \"Ah!\"

M whispered something to Bhavanāth.

BHAVANĀTH: \"M. says: \'As long as I have not seen the elephant, how can
I know whether it can pass through the eye of a needle? I do not, know
God; how can I understand through reason whether or not He can incarnate
Himself as man?\"

MASTER: \"Everything is possible for God. It is He who casts the spell.
The magician swallows the knife and takes it out again; he swallows
stones and bricks.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"The Brahmos say that a man should perform his worldly
duties. He must not renounce them.\"

GIRISH: \"Yes, I saw something like that in their paper, the Sulabha
Samachar. But a man cannot even finish all the works that are necessary
for him in order to know God, and still he speaks of worldly duties.\"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled a little, looked at M., and made a sign with his
eye, as if to say, \"What he says is right.\"

M understood that this question of performing duties was an extremely
difficult one.

Purna arrived.

MASTER: \"Who told you about our being here?\"

PURNA: \"Sarada.\"

MASTER (to the woman devotees): \"Give him some refreshments.\"

**Narendra\'s music**

Narendra was preparing to sing. The Master and the devotees were eager
to hear his music. Narendra sang:

> *Śiva, Thy ready thunderbolt rules over meadows, hills, and sky!*
>
> *O God of Gods! O Slayer of Time! Thou the Great Void, the King of
> Dharma!*
>
> *Śiva, Thou Blessed One, redeem me; take away my grievous sin.*

He sang again:

> *Sweet is Thy name, O Refuge of the humble!*
>
> *It falls like sweetest nectar on our ears*
>
> *And comforts us, Beloved of our souls! . . .*
>
> *Again:*
>
> *Why, O mind, do you never call on Him*
>
> *Who takes away all fear of danger?*
>
> *Tricked by delusion you forget yourself,*
>
> *Enamoured of the world\'s bleak wilderness.*
>
> *Alas, what mockery is here!*
>
> *Comrades and wealth you cannot always keep;*
>
> *Take care lest you forget Him quite.*
>
> *Give up the false, O mind! Adore the Real;*
>
> *And all the grief will vanish from your life.*
>
> *Keep my good counsel in your heart.*
>
> *With sounding voice proclaim Lord Hari\'s name*
>
> *And cast away your false desires,*
>
> *If you would cross the ocean of this life;*
>
> *Surrender to Him body, mind, and soul,*
>
> *And worship Him with trusting love.*

PALTU: \"Won\'t you sing that one?\"

NARENDRA: \"Which one?\"

PALTU: \" \'When I behold Thy peerless face.\' \"

Narendra sang:

> *When I behold Thy peerless face, beaming with love, a Lord, What fear
> have I of earthly woe or of the frown of sorrow?*
>
> *As the first ray of the dawning sun dispels the dark,*
>
> *So too, Lord, when Thy blessed light bursts forth within the heart,*
>
> *It scatters all our grief and pain with sweetest balm.*
>
> *When on Thy love and grace I ponder, in my heart\'s deepest depths,*
>
> *Tears of joy stream down my cheeks beyond restraining.*
>
> *Hail, Gracious Lord! Hail, Gracious One! I shall proclaim Thy love.*
>
> *May my life-breath depart from me as I perform Thy works!*

At M.\'s request Narendra sang again, M. and many of the devotees
listening with folded hands:

> *Be drunk, O mind, be drunk with the Wine of Heavenly Bliss! Roll on
> the ground and weep, chanting Hari\'s sweet name! . . .*

Narendra sang again:

> *Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord Hari,*
>
> *The Stainless One, Pure Spirit through and through.*
>
> *How peerless is the light that in Him shines!*
>
> *How soul-bewitching is His wondrous form!*
>
> *How dear is He to all His devotees! . . .*

He sang another song:

> *This universe, wondrous and infinite,*
>
> *O Lord, is Thy handiwork;*
>
> *And the whole world is a treasure-house*
>
> *Full of Thy beauty and grace*
>
> *The stars glisten innumerable,*
>
> *Like gems on a necklace of gold;*
>
> *How can the myriad suns and moons*
>
> *Ever be numbered above?*
>
> *The earth is glowing with grain and gold,*
>
> *Thine ever brimming store;*
>
> *Uncounted stars, O God, sing forth:*
>
> *Blessed, blessed art Thou!*

Then he sang:

> *Upon the tray of the sky blaze bright*
>
> *The lamps of sun and moon;*
>
> *Like diamonds shine the glittering stars*
>
> *To deck Thy wondrous form. . . .*

He continued:

> *Fasten your mind, O man, on the Primal Purusha,*
>
> *Who is the Cause of all causes,*
>
> *The Stainless One, the Beginningless Truth*
>
> *As Prāna He pervades the infinite universe;*
>
> *The man of faith beholds Him*
>
> *Living, resplendent, the Root of all. . . .*

At Narayan\'s request Narendra sang:

> *Come! Come, Mother! Doll of my soul! My heart\'s Delight!*
>
> *In my heart\'s lotus come and sit, that I may see Thy face.*
>
> *Alas! Sweet Mother, even from birth I have suffered much;*
>
> *But I have borne it all, Thou knowest, gazing at Thee.*
>
> *Open the lotus of my heart, dear Mother! Reveal Thyself there.*

Then Narendra sang a song of his own choice:

> *In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles; Therefore
> the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave. . . .*

As Sri Ramakrishna heard this soul-enthralling song, he went into
samādhi. Narendra again sang:

> *Be drunk, O mind, be drunk with the Wine \'Of Heavenly Bliss! . . .*

The Master was in samādhi. He was sitting on a pillow, dangling his
feet, facing the north and leaning against the wall. The devotees were
seated around him.

In an ecstatic mood Sri Ramakrishna talked to the Divine Mother. He
said: \"I shall take my meal now. Art Thou come? Hast Thou found Thy
lodging and left Thy baggage there and then come out?\" He continued:
\"I don\'t enjoy anybody\'s company now. Why should I listen to the
music, Mother? That diverts part of my mind to the outside world.\"

The Master was gradually regaining consciousness of the outer world.
Looking at the devotees he said: \"Years ago I used to be amazed to see
people keeping kai fish alive in a pot of water. I would say: \'How
cruel these people are! They will finally kill the fish.\' But later, as
changes came over my mind, I realized that bodies are like pillow-cases.
It doesn\'t matter whether they remain or drop off.\"

BHAVANĀTH: \"Then may one injure a man without incurring sin? Kill
him?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, it is permissible if one has achieved that state of mind.
But not everyone has it. It is the state of Brahmajnana.

\"By coming down a step or two from samādhi I enjoy bhakti and bhakta.

**Vidyā-māyā and Avidyā-māyā**

\"There exist in God both vidyā and avidyā. Vidyā-māyā leads one to God,
and Avidyā-māyā away from Him. Knowledge, devotion, compassion, and
renunciation belong to the realm of vidyā. With the help of these a man
comes near God. One step more and he attains God, Knowledge of Brahman.
In that state he clearly feels and sees that it is God who has become
everything. He has nothing to give up and nothing to accept. It is
impossible for him to be angry with anyone.

\"One day I was riding in a carriage. I saw two prostitutes standing on
a verandah. They appeared to me to be embodiments of the Divine Mother
Herself. I saluted them.

\"When I first attained this exalted state I could not worship Mother
Kāli or give Her the food offering. Haladhāri and Hriday told me that on
account of this the temple officer had slandered me. But I only laughed;
I wasn\'t in the least angry. Attain Brahmajnana and then roam about
enjoying God\'s lila. A holy man came to a town and went about seeing
the sights. He met another sādhu, an acquaintance. The latter said: \'I
see you are gadding about. Where is your baggage? I hope no thief has
stolen it.\' The first sādhu said: \'Not at all. First I found a
lodging, put my things in the room in proper order, and locked the door.
Now I am enjoying the fun of the city.\' \" (All laugh.)

BHAVANĀTH: \"These are very lofty words.\"

M (to himself): \"Tasting God\'s lila after Brahmajnana! Climbing down
to the ordinary plane of consciousness after the attainment of
samādhi!\"

**Knowledge of Brahman**

MASTER (to M. and the others): \"Is it an easy thing to obtain the
Knowledge of Brahman? It is not possible unless the mind is annihilated.
The guru said to the disciple, \'Give me your mind and I shall give you
Knowledge.\' In this state one enjoys only spiritual talk and the
company of devotees.

(To Ram) \"You are a physician. You know that medicine works only when
it mixes with the patient\'s blood and becomes one with it. Likewise, in
the state of Brahmajnana one sees God both within and without. One sees
that it is God Himself who has become the body, mind, life, and soul.\"

M (to himself): \"Assimilation!\"

MASTER: \"A man attains Brahmajnana as soon as his mind is annihilated.
With the annihilation of the mind dies the ego, which says \'I\', \'I\'.
One also attains the knowledge of Brahman by following the path of
devotion. One also attains it by following the path of knowledge, that
is to say, discrimination. The jnanis discriminate, saying, \'Neti,
neti\', that is, \'All this is illusory, like a dream.\' They analyse
the world through the process of \'Not this, not this\'; it is māyā.
When the world vanishes, only the jivas, that is to say, so many egos,
remain.

\"Each ego may be likened to a pot. Suppose there are ten pots filled
with water, and the sun is reflected in them. How many suns do you
see?\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Ten reflections. Besides, there certainly exists the real
Sun.\"

MASTER: \"Suppose you break one pot. How many suns do you see now?\"

DEVOTEE: \"Nine reflected suns. But there certainly exists the real
sun.\"

MASTER: \"All right. Suppose you break nine pots. How many suns do you
see now?\"

DEVOTEE: \"One reflected sun. But there certainly exists the real sun.\"

MASTER (to Girish): \"What remains when the last pot is broken?\"

GIRISH: \"That real sun, sir.\"

MASTER: \"No. What remains cannot be described. What is remains. How
will you know there is a real sun unless there is a reflected sun?
\'I-consciousness\' is destroyed in samādhi. A man climbing down from
samādhi to the lower plane cannot describe what he has seen there.\" It
was late in the evening. Lamps were burning in the drawing-room. Sri
Ramakrishna was in a spiritual mood. The devotees sat around him.

MASTER (in the ecstatic mood): \"There is no one else here; so I am
telling you this. He who from the depth of his soul seeks to know God
will certainly realize Him. He must. He alone who is restless for God
and seeks nothing but Him will certainly realize Him.

\"Those who belong to this places have already come. Those who will come
from now on are outsiders. Such people will come now and then. The
Divine Mother will tell them: \'Do this. Call on God in this way.\'

\"Why doesn\'t man\'s mind dwell on God? You see, more powerful than God
is His Mahamaya, His Power of Illusion. More powerful than the judge is
his orderly. (All laugh.)

**The all-powerful māyā**

+---+-----------+-------+---------------------------------------------+
| \ | said to   |       |                                             |
| " | Nārada :  |       |                                             |
| R | \'I am    |       |                                             |
| ā | very much |       |                                             |
| m | pleased   |       |                                             |
| a | with your |       |                                             |
|   | prayer.   |       |                                             |
|   | Ask a     |       |                                             |
|   | boon of   |       |                                             |
|   | Me.\'     |       |                                             |
|   | Nārada    |       |                                             |
|   | replied,  |       |                                             |
|   | \'O       |       |                                             |
+---+-----------+-------+---------------------------------------------+
| R | > may I   | > dev | Your Lotus Feet, and may I not be deluded   |
| ā | > have    | otion | by Your world-bewitching                    |
| m | > pure    | > to  |                                             |
| a |           |       |                                             |
| , |           |       |                                             |
+---+-----------+-------+---------------------------------------------+
| m |           | > so: | something else.\' Nārada replied, \'No,     |
| ā |           | > ask | Rāma, I do not want any other               |
| y |           | > for |                                             |
| ā |           |       |                                             |
| ! |           |       |                                             |
| \ |           |       |                                             |
| ' |           |       |                                             |
| R |           |       |                                             |
| ā |           |       |                                             |
| m |           |       |                                             |
| a |           |       |                                             |
| s |           |       |                                             |
| a |           |       |                                             |
| i |           |       |                                             |
| d |           |       |                                             |
| , |           |       |                                             |
| \ |           |       |                                             |
| ' |           |       |                                             |
| B |           |       |                                             |
| e |           |       |                                             |
| i |           |       |                                             |
| t |           |       |                                             |
+---+-----------+-------+---------------------------------------------+
| b |           |       |                                             |
| o |           |       |                                             |
| o |           |       |                                             |
| n |           |       |                                             |
| . |           |       |                                             |
| \ |           |       |                                             |
| ' |           |       |                                             |
+---+-----------+-------+---------------------------------------------+

\"Everyone is under the spell of this world-bewitching māyā. When God
assumes a human body, He too comes under the spell. Rāma wandered about
weeping for Sita. \'Brahman weeps entangled in the snare of the five
elements.\' But you must remember this: God, by His mere will, can
liberate Himself from this snare.\"

BHAVANĀTH: \"The guard of a railway train shuts himself of his own will
in a carriage; but he can get out whenever he wants to.\'

MASTER: \'The Isvarakotis-Divine Incarnations, for instance-can liberate
themselves whenever they want to; but the jivakotis cannot. Jivas are
imprisoned by \'woman and gold\'. When the doors and windows of a room
are fastened with screws, how can a man get out?\"

BHAVANĀTH (smiling): \"Ordinary men are like the third-class passengers
on a railway train. When the doors of their compartments are locked,
they have no way to get out.\"

GIRISH: \"If a man is so strongly tied hand and foot, then what is his
way?\"

MASTER: \"He has nothing to fear if God Himself, as the guru cuts the
chain of māyā.\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 41**

AT RAM\'S HOUSE

> Saturday, May 23, 1885

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in the drawing-room on the ground floor of
Ram\'s house. He was surrounded by

devotees and was conversing with them. Mahima sat in front of him, M. to
his left. Paltu, Bhavanāth,

Nityagopal, Haramohan, and a few others sat around him. It was about
five o\'clock in the afternoon. The

Master inquired after several devotees.

MASTER (to M.): \"Hasn\'t the younger Naren arrived yet?\"

Presently the younger Naren entered the room.

MASTER: \"What about him?\"

M: \"Who, sir?\"

MASTER: \"Kishori. Isn\'t Girish Ghosh coming? What about Narendra?\" A
few minutes later Narendra arrived and saluted Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"It would be fine if Kedār were here. He
agrees with Girish. (To Mahima, smiling) He says the same thing.\"

Ram had arranged the kirtan. With folded hands the musician said to Sri
Ramakrishna, \"Sir, I can begin if you give the order.\"

The Master drank some water and chewed spices from a small bag. He asked
M. to close the bag.

The musician started the kirtan. As Sri Ramakrishna heard the sound of
the drum he went into an ecstatic mood. While listening to the prelude
of the kirtan he plunged into deep samādhi. He placed his legs on the
lap of Nityagopal, who was sitting near him. The devotee, too, was in an
ecstatic mood. He was weeping. The other devotees looked on intently.

**Nitya and Lila**

Regaining partial consciousness, Sri Ramakrishna said: \"From the Nitya
to the Lila and from the Lila to the Nitya. (To Nityagopal) What is your
ideal?\"

NITYAGOPAL: \"Both are good.\"

Sri Ramakrishna closed his eyes and said: \"Is it only this? Does God
exist only when the eyes are closed, and cease to exist when the eyes
are opened? The Lila belongs to Him to whom the Nitya belongs, and the
Nitya belongs to Him to whom the Lila belongs. (To Mahima) My dear sir,
let me tell you-\"

MAHIMA: \"Revered sir, both are according to the will of God.\"

MASTER: \"Some people climb the seven floors of a building and cannot
get down; but some climb up and then, at will, visit the lower floors.

\"Uddhava said to the gopis: \'He whom you address as your Krishna
dwells in all beings. It is He alone who has become the universe and its
living beings.\'

\"Therefore I say, does a man meditate on God only when his eyes are
closed? Doesn\'t he see anything of God when his eyes are open?\"

MAHIMA: \"I have a question to ask, sir. A lover of God needs Nirvāna
some time or other, doesn\'t he?\"

**The seed of bhakti cannot be destroyed**

MASTER: \"It can\'t be said that bhaktas need Nirvāna. According to some
schools there is an eternal Krishna and there are also His eternal
devotees. Krishna is Spirit embodied, and His Abode also is Spirit
embodied. Krishna is eternal and the devotees also are eternal. Krishna
and the devotees are like the moon and the stars-always near each other.
You yourself repeat: \'what need is there of penance if God is seen
within and without?\' Further, I have told you that the devotee who is
born with an element of Vishnu cannot altogether get rid of bhakti.

Once I fell into the clutches of a Jnāni, who made me listen to Vedānta
for eleven months. But he couldn\'t altogether destroy the seed of
bhakti in me. No matter where my mind wandered, it would come back to
the Divine Mother. Whenever I sang of Her, Nangta would weep and say,
\'Ah! What is this?\' You see, he was such a great Jnāni and still he
wept. (To the younger Naren and the others) Remember the popular saying
that if a man drinks the juice of the *Ālekh* creeper, a plant grows
inside his stomach. Once the seed of bhakti is sown, the effect is
inevitable: it will gradually grow into a tree with flowers and fruits.

\"You may reason and argue a thousand times, but if you have the seed of
bhakti within you, you will surely come back to Hari.\"

The devotees listened silently to the Master. Sri Ramakrishna asked
Mahima, laughing, \"What is the thing you enjoy most?\"

MAHIMA (smiling): \"Nothing, sir. I like mangoes.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"All by yourself? Or do you want to share them with
others?\"

MAHIMA (smiling) : \"I am not so anxious to give others a share. I may
as well eat them all by myself.\"

**Reality includes both Absolute and universe**

MASTER: \"But do you know my attitude? I accept both, the Nitya and the
Lila. Doesn\'t God exist if one looks around with eyes open? After
realizing Him, one knows that He is both the Absolute and the universe.
It is He who is the Indivisible Satchidananda. Again, it is He who has
become the universe and its living beings.

**Futility of mere scholarship**

\"One needs *sādhanā*. Mere study of the scriptures will not do. I
noticed that though Vidyāsāgar had no doubt read a great deal, he had
not realized what was inside him; he was satisfied with helping boys get
their education, but had not tasted the Bliss of God. What will mere
study accomplish? How little one assimilates! The almanac may forecast
twenty measures of rain; but you don\'t get a drop by squeezing its
pages.\"

MAHIMA: \"We have so many duties in the world. Where is the time for
*sādhanā*?\"

MASTER: \"Why should you say such a thing? It is you who describe the
world as illusory, like a dream.

\"Rāma and Lakshmana wanted to go to Ceylon. But the ocean was before
them. Lakshmana was angry. Taking his bow and arrow, he said: \'I shall
kill Varuna. This ocean prevents our going to Ceylon.\' Rāma explained
the matter to him, saying: \'Lakshmana, all that you are seeing is
unreal, like a dream. The ocean is unreal. Your anger is also unreal. It
is equally unreal to think of destroying one unreal thing by means of
another.\'\" Mahimacharan kept quiet. He had many duties in the world.
He had lately started a school to help others.

MASTER (to Mahima): \"Sambhu once said to me: \'I have some money. It is
my desire to spend it for good works-for schools and dispensaries,
roads, and so forth.\' I said to him: \' It will be good if you can do
these works in a selfless spirit. But it is extremely difficult to
perform unselfish action. Desire for fruit comes from nobody knows
where. Let me ask you something. Suppose God appears before you; will
you pray to Him;

*Vidyā Māyā*

*Gunās*.\'

then, for such things as schools and dispensaries and hospitals?\' \"

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, what is the way for worldly people?\"

**Advice to the worldly**

MASTER: \"The Company of holy men. Worldly people should listen to
spiritual talk. They are in a state of madness, intoxicated with \'woman
and gold\'. A drunkard should be given rice-water as an antidote.
Drinking it slowly, he gradually recovers his normal consciousness.

**The real teacher**

\"A worldly person should also receive instructions from a sadguru, a
real teacher. Such a teacher has certain signs. You should hear about
Banāras only from a man who has been to Banāras and seen it. Mere
book-learning will not do. One should not receive instruction from a
pundit who has not realized the world to be unreal. Only if a pundit has
discrimination and renunciation is he entitled to instruct.

\"Samadhyayi remarked that God was dry. Think of his speaking like that
of Him who is the embodiment of sweetness! It sounds like the remark,
\'My uncle\'s cow-shed is full of horses.\' (All laugh.)

\"Yes, a worldly person is in a state of intoxication. He always says to
himself: \'It is I who am doing everything. All these-the house and
family are mine.\' Baring his teeth, he says: \'What will happen to my
wife and children without me? How will they get along? Who will look
after my wife and children?\' Rākhāl said one day, \'What will happen to
my wife?\'\"

HARAMOHAN: \"Did Rākhāl say that?\"

**Go beyond knowledge and ignorance**

MASTER: \"What else could he do? He who has knowledge has ignorance
also. \'How amazing!\' Lakshmana said to Rāma. \'Even a sage like
Vasishtha is stricken with grief because of the death of his sons!\'
\'Brother,\' replied Rāma, \'he who has knowledge has ignorance also.
Therefore go beyond both knowledge and ignorance.\'

\"Suppose a thorn has pierced a man\'s foot. He picks another thorn to
pull out the first one. After extracting the first thorn with the help
of the second, he throws both away. One should use the thorn of
knowledge to pull out the thorn of ignorance. Then one throws away both
the thorns, knowledge and ignorance, and attains vijnāna. What is
vijnāna? It is to know God distinctly by realizing His existence through
an intuitive experience

and to speak to Him intimately. That is why Sri Krishna said to Arjuna,
\'Go beyond the three

\"In order to attain vijnāna one has to accept the help of *Vidyā Māyā*.
*Vidyā Māyā* includes discriminationthat is to say, God is real and the
world illusory-and dispassion, and also chanting God\'s name and
glories,

meditation, the company of holy persons, prayer, and so forth. may be
likened to the last few

steps before the roof. Next is the roof, the realization of God.

**Nature of the worldly**

\"Worldly people are in a state of chronic intoxication-mad with \'woman
and gold\'; they are insensible to spiritual ideas. That is why I love
the youngsters not yet stained by \'woman and gold\'. They are \'good
receptacles\' and may become useful in God\'s work. But as for worldly
people, you lose almost everything while trying to eliminate the
worthless stuff in them. They are like bony fish-almost all bones and
very little meat.

\"Worldly people are like mangoes struck by hail. If you want to offer
them to God, you have to purify them by sprinkling them with Ganges
water. Even then they are seldom used in the temple worship. If you are
to use them at all, you have to apply Brahmajnana, that is to say, you
have to persuade yourself that it is God alone who has become
everything.\"

A Theosophist gentleman arrived with Aswini Kumar Dutta and the son of
Behari Bhaduri. The Mukherji brothers entered the room and saluted Sri
Ramakrishna. Arrangements were being made for devotional music

in the courtyard. At the first beat of the drum the Master left the room
and went there. The devotees followed him.

Bhavanāth introduced Aswini to the Master. The Master introduced him to
M. Aswini and M. were talking together when Narendra arrived. Sri
Ramakrishna said to Aswini, \"this is Narendra.\"

**Saturday, June 13, 1885**

About three o\'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was resting in his
room after the midday meal. A pundit was sitting on a mat on the floor.
Near the north door of the room stood a brahmin woman who had recently
lost her only daughter and was stricken with grief. Kishori, too, was in
the room. M. arrived and saluted the Master. He was accompanied by Dwija
and a few other devotees.

Sri Ramakrishna was not well. He had been suffering from an inflamed
throat. These were the hot days of summer. M. was not keeping well
either, and of late he had not been able to visit Sri Ramakrishna
frequently.

MASTER (to M.): \"How are you? It is nice to see you. The bel-fruit you
sent me was very good.\"

M: \"I am slightly better now, sir.\"

MASTER: \"It is very hot. Take a little ice now and then. I have been
feeling the heat very much myself; so I ate a great deal of ice-cream.
That is why I have this sore throat. The saliva smells very bad.

**Master\'s adherence to truth**

\"I have said to the Divine Mother: \'Mother, make me well. I shall not
eat ice-cream any more.\' Next I said to Her that I wouldn\'t eat ice
either. Since I have given my word to the Mother, I shall certainly not
eat these things. But sometimes I become forgetful. Once I said that I
wouldn\'t eat fish on Sundays; but one Sunday I forgot and ate fish. But
I cannot consciously go back on my word. The other day I asked a devotee
to bring my water-jug to the pine-grove. As he had to go elsewhere,
another man brought the jug. But I couldn\'t use that water. I was
helpless. I waited there until the first man brought water for me.

\"When I renounced everything with an offering of flowers at the Lotus
Feet of the Mother, I said: \'Here, Mother, take Thy holiness, take Thy
unholiness. Here, Mother, take Thy dharma, take Thy adharma. Here,
Mother, take Thy sin, take Thy virtue. Here, Mother, take Thy good, take
Thy evil. And give me only pure bhakti.\' But I could not say, \'Here,
Mother, take Thy truth, take Thy falsehood.\' \"

A devotee had brought some ice. Again and again the Master asked M.,
\"Shall I eat it?\"

M: said humbly, \"Please don\'t eat it without consulting the Mother:\"
Sri Ramakrishna could not take the ice.

MASTER: \"It is the bhakta, and not the Jnāni, who discriminates between
holiness and unholiness. Vijay\'s

mother-in-law said to me: \'How little I have achieved of my spiritual
ideal! I cannot take food from everybody.\' I said to her: \'Is eating
everybody\'s food a sign of jnāna? A dog eats anything and everything.
Does that make it a Jnāni?\'

(To M.) \"Why do I eat a variety of dishes? In order not to become
monotonous. Otherwise I should have to renounce the devotees.

\"I said to Keshab: \'If I instruct you from a still higher standpoint,
then you won\'t be able to preserve your organization. In the state of
jnāna organizations and things like that become unreal, like a dream.\'

\"One time I gave up fish. At first I suffered from it; afterwards it
didn\'t bother me much. If someone burns up a bird\'s nest, the bird
flies about; it takes shelter in the sky. If a man truly realizes that
the body and the world are unreal, then his soul attains samādhi.

\"Formerly I had the state of mind of a Jnāni: I couldn\'t enjoy the
company of men. I would hear that a Jnāni or a bhakta lived at a certain
place; then, a few days later, I would learn that he was dead.
Everything seemed

to me impermanent; so I couldn\'t enjoy people\'s company. Later the
Mother brought my mind down to a lower plane; She so changed my mind
that I could enjoy love of God and His devotees.\"

**Divine Incarnation**

Next the Master began to talk about Divine Incarnation.

MASTER (to M.): \"Do you know why God incarnates Himself as a man? It is
because through a human body one can hear His words. He sports through
it. He tastes divine bliss through a human body. But through His other
devotees God manifests only a small part of Himself. A devotee is like
something you get a little juice from after much sucking - like a flower
you get a drop of honey from after much sucking. (To M.) Do you
understand this?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. Very well\"

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk to Dwija, who was about sixteen years old.
His father had married a second time. Dwija often accompanied M. to
Dakshineswar, and Sri Ramakrishna was fond of him. The boy said that his
father opposed his coming to Dakshineswar.

MASTER: \"And your brothers too? Do they speak slightingly of me?\"

Dwija did not answer.

M. (to the Master): \"Those who speak slightingly of you will be cured
of it after getting a few more blows from the world.\"

MASTER (referring to Dwija\'s brothers): \"They live with their
step-mother. So they are getting blows.\"

All were silent a moment.

MASTER (to M.): \"Introduce Dwija to Purna some time.\"

M: \"Yes, I shall. (To Dwija) Go to Panihati.\"

MASTER: \"I am asking everyone to send people to Panihati. (To M.)
Won\'t you go?\"

Sri Ramakrishna intended to visit the religious festival at Panihati; so
he was asking the devotees to go too.

M: \"Yes, sir, I want to go.\"

MASTER: \"We shall engage a big boat; then it won\'t toss about. Will
Girish Ghosh be there?\"

Sri Ramakrishna looked steadily at Dwija.

Master: \"Well, there are so many youngsters in the city; why does this
boy come here? (To M,) Tell me what you think. Certainly he has
inherited some good tendencies from his previous birth.\"

M: \"Undoubtedly, sir.\"

MASTER: \"There is such a thing as inborn tendencies. When a man has
performed many good actions in his previous births, in the final birth
he becomes guileless. In the final birth he acts somewhat like a madcap.

\"To tell you the truth, everything happens by God\'s will. When He says
\'Yea\', everything comes to pass, and when He says \'Nay\', everything
comes to a standstill.

\"Why is it that one man should not bless another? Because nothing can
happen by man\'s will: things come to pass or disappear by God\'s will.

\'The other day I went to Captain\'s house. I saw some young boys going
along the road. They belong to a different class. I saw one of them,
about nineteen or twenty years old, with his hair parted on the side. He
was whistling as he walked along.

\"I see some immersed in the thickest tamas. They play the flute and are
proud of it.

(To Dwija) \"Why should a man of Knowledge be afraid of criticism? His
understanding is as immovable as the anvil in a blacksmith\'s shop.
Blows from the hammer fall continually on the anvil but cannot affect it
in the least.

\"I saw X-\'s father going along the street.\"

1.  \"He is a very artless man.\" MASTER: \"But he has red eyes.\"

Sri Ramakrishna told the devotees about his visit to Captain\'s house.
Captain had criticized the young men who visited the Master. Perhaps
Hazra had poisoned his mind.

MASTER: \"I was talking to Captain. I said: \'Nothing exists except
Purusha and Prakriti. Nārada said to Rāma, \"O Rāma, all the men You see
are parts of Yourself, and all the women are parts of Sita.\" \'

\"Captain was highly pleased. He said: \'You alone have the right
perception. All men are really Rāma, being parts of Rāma; all women are
really Sita, being parts of Sita.\'

**Master reprimands Captain**

\"Immediately after saying this he began to criticize the young
devotees. He said: \'They study English books and don\'t discriminate
about their food. It is not good that they should visit you frequently.
It may do you harm. Hazra is a real man, a grand fellow. Don\'t allow
those young people to visit you so much.\' At first I said, \'What can I
do if they come?\' Then I gave him some mortal blows. His daughter
laughed. I said to him: \'God is far, far away from the worldly-minded.
But God is very near the man-nay, within a distance of three
cubits-whose mind is free from worldliness.\' Speaking of Rākhāl ,
Captain said, \'He eats with all sorts of people.\' Perhaps he had heard
it from Hazra. Thereupon I said to him: \'A man may practise intense
austerity and japa, but he won\'t achieve anything if his mind dwells on
the world. But blessed is the man who keeps his mind on God even though
he eats pork. He will certainly realize God in due time. Hazra, with all
his austerity and japa, doesn\'t allow an opportunity to slip by for
earning money as a broker.\'

\"\'Yes, yes!\' said Captain. \'You are right.\' I said to him further,
\'A few minutes ago you said that all men were parts of Rāma and all
women parts of Sita, and now you are talking like this!\'

\"Captain said: \'Yes, that\'s true. But you don\'t love everybody.\'

\"I said: \'According to the scriptures, water is God. We see water
everywhere. But some water we drink, some we bathe in, and some we use
for washing dirty things. Here sit your wife and daughter. I see them as
embodiments of the Blessed Mother.\'

\"Thereupon Captain said, \'Yes, yes! That\'s true.\' He wanted to
apologize by touching my feet.\"

After speaking thus, Sri Ramakrishna laughed. Then he began to tell of
Captain\'s many virtues.

MASTER: \"Captain has many virtues. Every day he attends to his
devotions. He himself performs the worship of the Family Deity. How many
mantras he recites while bathing the image! He is a great ritualist. He
performs his daily devotions, such as worship, japa, *Ārati*, recital of
the scriptures, and chanting of hymns.

\"I scolded Captain and said: \'Too much reading has spoiled you. Don\'t
read any more.\'

\"About my own spiritual state Captain said, \'Your soul, like a bird,
is ready to fly.\' There are two entities: jivatma, the embodied soul,
and Paramatma, the Supreme Soul. The embodied soul is the bird. The
Supreme Soul is like the Ākāśa; it is the Chidakasa, the Ākāśa of
Consciousness. Captain said: \'Your embodied soul flies into the Ākāśa
of Consciousness. Thus you go into samādhi.\'

(Smiling) \"He critisized the Bengalis. He said: \'The Bengalis are
fools. They have a gem near them, but they cannot recognize it.\'

\"Captain\'s father was a great devotee. He was a *Subedar* in the
English army. Even on the battle-field he would perform his worship at
the proper time. With one hand he would worship Śiva and with the other
he would wield his gun and sword.

(To M.) \"But Captain is engaged in worldly duties day and night.
Whenever I go to his house I see him surrounded by his wife and
children. Besides, his men bring him their account books now and then.
But at times his mind dwells on God also. It is like the case of a
typhoid patient who is always in a delirium. Now and then he gets a
flash of consciousness and cries out: \'I want a drink of water! I want
a drink of water!\' But while you are giving him the water, he becomes
unconscious again and is not aware of anything. I said to Captain, \'You
are a ritualist.\' He said: \'Yes, I feel very happy while performing
worship and things like that. Worldly people have no other way.\'

\"I said to him: \' but must one perform formal worship for ever? How
long does a bee buzz about? As long as it hasn\'t lighted on a flower.
While sipping honey it doesn\'t buzz.\' \'But\', he said, \'can we, like
you, give up worship and other rituals?\' Yet he doesn\'t always say the
same thing. Sometimes he says that all this is inert, sometimes that all
this is conscious. I say: \'What do you mean by inert? Everything is
Chaitanya, Consciousness.\'\"

Sri Ramakrishna asked M. about Purna.

MASTER: \"If I see Purna once more, then my longing for him will
diminish. How intelligent he is! His mind is much drawn to me. He says,
\'I too feel a strange sensation in my heart for you.\' (To M.) They
have taken him away from your school. Will that harm you?\"

1.  \"If Vidyāsāgar tells me that Purna\'s relatives have taken him away
    from the school on my account, I have an explanation to give him.\"

MASTER: \"What will you say?\"

1.  \"I shall say that one thinks of God in holy company. That is by no
    means bad. Further, I shall tell him that the text-books prescribed
    by the school authorities say that one should love God with all
    one\'s soul\" (The Master laughs.)

MASTER : \"At Captain\'s house I sent for the younger Naren. I said to
him:\' where is your house? I want to see it.\' \'Please do come\', he
said. But he became nervous as we were going there, lest his father
should know about it. (All laugh.)

(To a visitor) \"You haven\'t been here for a long time-about seven or
eight months.\"

VISITOR: \"About a year, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Another gentleman used to come with you.\"

VISITOR: \"Yes, sir. Nilmani Babu.\"

MASTER: \"Why doesn\'t he come any more? Ask him to come some time. I
want to see him. Who is this boy with you?\"

VISITOR: \"He comes from Assam.\"

MASTER: \"Where is Assam? In which direction?\"

Dwija spoke to the Master about Ashu. Ashu\'s father was arranging for
his marriage, but Ashu had no wish to marry.

MASTER: \"See, he doesn\'t want to marry. They are forcing him.\"

Sri Ramakrishna said to a devotee that he should show respect to his
elder brother. He said: \"The elder brother is like one\'s father.
Respect him.\"

A pundit was sitting with the devotees. He came from upper India.

MASTER (smiling, to M.): \"The pundit is a great student of the
Bhagavata.\"

M. and the devotees looked at the pundit.

MASTER (to the pundit): \"Well, sir, what is Yogamaya?\"

The pundit gave some sort of explanation.

MASTER: \"Why isn\'t Radhika called Yogamaya?\"

The pundit also answered this question after a fashion.

**Significance of Radhika**

MASTER: \"Radhika is full of unmixed sattva, the embodiment of prema.
Yogamaya contains all the three *Gunās*-sattva, rajas, and tamas; but
Radhika has nothing but pure sattva.(To M.) \"Narendra now respects
Radhika very much. He says that if anyone wants to know how to love
Satchidananda, he can learn it from her.

\"Satchidananda wanted to taste divine bliss for Itself. That is why It
created Radhika. She was created from the person of Satchidananda
Krishna. Satchidananda Krishna is the \'container\', and He Himself, in
the form of Radhika, is the \'contained\'. He manifested Himself in that
way in order to taste His own bliss, that is to say, in order to
experience divine bliss by loving Satchidananda.

\"Therefore it is written in the Vaishnava books that after her birth
Radhika did not open her eyes. The idea is that she did not wish to see
any human being. Yaśoda came with Krishna in her arms to see Radhika.
Only then did she open her eyes, to behold Krishna. In a playful mood
Krishna touched her eyes. (To the Assamese boy) Haven\'t you seen this?
Small children touch others\' eyes with their hands.\"

The pundit was about to take leave of Sri Ramakrishna.

PUNDIT: \"I must go home.\"

MASTER (tenderly): \"Have you earned anything?\"

PUNDIT: \"The market is very dull. I\'ve earned nothing.\"

A few minutes later he saluted the Master and departed.

MASTER (to M.): \"You see how great the difference is between worldly
people and the youngsters? This pundit has been worrying about money day
and night. He has come to Calcutta to earn money; otherwise his people
at home will have nothing to eat. So he has to knock at different doors.
When will he concentrate his mind on God? But the youngsters are
untouched by \'woman and gold\'; hence they can direct their mind to God

whenever they desire.

\"The youngsters do not enjoy worldly people\'s company. Rākhāl used to
say, \'I feel nervous at the sight of the worldly-minded.\' When I was
first beginning to have spiritual experiences, I used to shut the doors
of my room when I saw worldly people coming.

**Master\'s boyhood reminiscences**

\"As a boy, at Kamarpukur, I loved Ram Mallick dearly. But afterwards,
when he came here, I couldn\'t even touch him. Ram Mallick and I were
great friends during our boyhood. We were together day and night; we
slept together. At that time I was sixteen or seventeen years old.
People used to say, \'If one of them were a woman they would marry each
other.\' Both of us used to play at his house. I remember those days
very well. His relatives used to come riding in palanquins. Now he has a
shop at Chanak. I sent for him many a time; he came here the other day
and spent two days. Ram said he had no children; he brought up his
nephew, but the boy died. He told me this with a sigh; his eyes were
filled with tears; he was grief-stricken for his nephew. He said further
that since they had no children of their own, all his wife\'s affection
had been turned to the nephew. She was completely overwhelmed with
grief. Ram said to her: \'You are crazy. What will you gain by grieving?
Do you want to go to Banāras?\' You see, he called his wife crazy. Grief
for the boy totally \'diluted\' him. I found he had no stuff in him. I
couldn\'t touch him.\"

The brahmin lady still stood near the north door. She was a widow. Her
only daughter had been married to a very aristocratic man, a landlord in
Calcutta with the title of Raja. Whenever the daughter visited her she
was escorted by liveried footmen. Then the mother\'s heart swelled with
pride. Just a few days ago the daughter had died, and now she was beside
herself with sorrow.

The brahmin lady listened to the account of Ram Mallick s grief for his
nephew. For the last few days she had been running to the Master from
her home at Baghbazar like an insane person. She was eager to know
whether Sri Ramakrishna could suggest any remedy for her unquenchable
grief. Sri Ramakrishna resumed the conversation.

MASTER: \"A man came here the other day. He sat a few minutes and then
said, \'Let me go and see the \"moon-face\" of my child.\' I couldn\'t
control myself and said: \'So you prefer your son\'s \"moon-face\" to
God\'s \"moon-face\"! Get out, you fool!\'

**Magician and his magic**

(To M.) \"The truth is that God alone is real and all else unreal. Men,
universe, house, and children-all these are like the magic of the
magician. The magician strikes his wand and says: \'come delusion! Come
confusion!\' Then he says to the audience, \'Open the lid of the pot;
see the birds fly into the sky.\' But the magician alone is real and his
magic unreal. The unreal exists for a second and then vanishes.

\"Śiva was seated in Kailas. His companion Nandi was near Him. Suddenly
a terrific noise arose. \'Revered Sir,\' asked Nandi, \'what does that
mean?\' Śiva said: \'Ravana is born. That is its meaning.\' A few
moments later another terrific noise was heard. \'Now what is this
noise?\' Nandi asked. Śiva said with a smile, \'Now Ravana is dead.
Birth and death are like magic: you see the magic for a second and then
it disappears. God alone is real and all else unreal. Water alone is
real; its bubbles appear and disappear. They disappear into the very
water from which they rise.

\"God is like an ocean, and living beings are its bubbles. They are born
there and they die there. Children are like the few small bubbles around
a big one.

\"God alone is real. Make an effort to cultivate love for Him and find
out the means to realize Him. What will you gain by grieving?\"

All sat in silence. The brahmin lady said, \"May I go home now? The
Master said to her tenderly: \"Do you want to go now? It is very hot.
Why now? You can go later in a carriage with the devotees.\"

Because the day was so hot, a devotee gave the Master a new fan made of
sandalwood. He was very much pleased and said: \"Good! Good! Om Tat Sat!
Kāli!\" First he fanned the pictures of the gods and goddesses, and then
he fanned himself. He said to M.: \"See! Feel the breeze!\" M. Was
highly pleased.

Captain arrived with his children.

Sri Ramakrishna said to Kishori, \"Please show the temples to the
children.\" He began to talk to Captain. M., Dwija, and the other
devotees were sitting on the floor. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the
small couch, facing the north. He asked Captain to sit in front of him
on the same couch.

MASTER: \"I was telling the devotees about you-your devotion, worship,
and *Ārati*.\"

CAPTAIN (bashfully): \"What do I know of worship and *Ārati*? How
insignificant I am!\"

**Harmless ego**

MASTER: \"Only the ego that is attached to \'woman and. gold\' is
harmful. But the ego that feels it is the servant of God does no harm to
anybody. Neither does the ego of a child, which is not under the control
of any *guna*. One moment children quarrel, and the next moment they are
on friendly terms. One moment they build their toy houses with great
care, and immediately afterwards they knock them down. There is no harm
in the \'I-consciousness\' that makes one feel oneself to be a child of
God or His servant. This ego is really no ego at all. It is like sugar
candy, which is not like other sweets. Other sweets make one ill; but
sugar candy relieves acidity. Or take the case of Om. It is unlike other
sounds.

\"With this kind of ego one is able to love Satchidananda. It is
impossible to get rid of the ego. Therefore it should be made to feel
that it is the devotee of God, His servant. Otherwise, how can one live?
How intense was the love of the gopis for Sri Krishna! (To Captain)
Please tell us something about the gopis. You read the Bhagavata so
much.\"

CAPTAIN: \"When Sri Krishna lived at Vrindāvan, without any of His royal
splendour, even then the gopis loved Him more than their own souls.
Therefore Sri Krishna said, \'How shall I be able to pay off my debt to
the gopis, who surrendered to me their all-their bodies, minds, and
souls?\' \"

Captain\'s words awakened intense love for Krishna in the Master\'s
mind.

He exclaimed, \"Govinda! Govinda! Govinda!\" and was about to go into an
ecstatic mood. Captain was amazed and said: \"How blessed he is! How
blessed he is!\"

Captain and the devotees watched this love-ecstasy of Sri Ramakrishna.
They sat quietly gazing at him, awaiting his return to the consciousness
of the world.

MASTER: \"Tell us more.\"

CAPTAIN: \"Sri Krishna is unattainable by the yogis, by yogis like you;
but He can be attained by lovers like the gopis. How many years did the
yogis practise yoga for His vision! Yet they did not succeed. But the
gopis realized Him with such ease!\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, He ate from the hands of the gopis, wept for
them, played with them, and made many demands on them.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Bankim has written a life of Krishna.\"

MASTER: \"He accepts Krishna but not Radhika.\"

CAPTAIN: \"I see he doesn\'t accept Krishna\'s lila with the gopis.\"

MASTER: \"I also hear that Bankim says that one needs passions such as
lust.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"He has written in his magazine that the purpose of religion
is to give expression to our various

faculties: physical, mental, and spiritual.\"

CAPTAIN: \"I see. He believes that lust and so forth are necessary. But
he doesn\'t believe that Sri Krishna could enjoy His sportive pleasure
in the world, that God could incarnate Himself in a human form and sport
in Vrindāvan with Radha and the gopis.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"But these things are, not written in the newspaper.
How could he believe them?

\"A man said to his friend, \'Yesterday, as I was passing through a
certain part of the city, I saw a house fall with a crash.\' \'Wait\',
said the friend. \'Let me look it up in the newspaper.\' But this
incident wasn\'t mentioned in the paper. Thereupon the man said, \'But
the paper doesn\'t mention it.\' His friend replied, \'I saw it with my
own eyes.\' \'Be that as it may, said the man, \'I can\'t believe it as
long as it isn\'t in the paper.\'

\"How can Bankim believe that God sports about as a man? He doesn\'t get
it from his English education. It is very hard to explain how God fully
incarnates Himself as man. Isn\'t that so? The manifestation of Infinity
in this human body only three and a half cubits tall!\"

CAPTAIN: \"Krishna is God Himself. In describing Him we have to use such
terms as \'whole\' and \'part\'.\"

MASTER: \"Whole and part are like fire and its sparks. An Incarnation of
God is for the sake of the bhaktas and not of the jnanis. It is said in
the Adhyātma Rāmāyana that Rāma alone is both the Pervading Spirit and
everything pervaded. \'You are the Supreme Lord distinguished as the
*Vachaka,* the signifying symbol, and the *Vachya*, the object
signified.\'\"

CAPTAIN: \"The \'signifying symbol\' means the pervader, and the
\'object signified\' means the thing pervaded.\"

MASTER: \"The pervader in this case is a finite form, It is God
incarnating Himself as a human being.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was talking thus to Captain and the devotees when
Jaygopal Sen and Trailokya of the Brahmo Samaj arrived. They saluted the
Master and sat down. Sri Ramakrishna looked at Trailokya with a smile
and continued the conversation.

**\"Wicked ego\" must be killed**

MASTER: \"It is on account of the ego that one is not able to see God.
In front of the door of God\'s mansion lies the stump of ego. One cannot
enter the mansion without jumping over the stump.

\"There was once a man who had acquired the power to tame ghosts. One
day, at his summons, a ghost appeared. The ghost said: \'now tell me
what you want me to do. The moment you cannot give me any work I shall
break your neck.\' The man had many things to accomplish, and he had the
ghost do them all, one by one. At last he could find nothing more for
the ghost to do. \'Now\', said the ghost, \'I am going to break your
neck.\' \'Wait a minute\', said the man. \'I shall return presently.\'
He ran to his teacher and said: \'Revered sir, I am in great danger.
This is my trouble.\' And he told his teacher his trouble and asked,
\'What shall I do now?\' The teacher said: \' do this. Tell the ghost to
straighten this kinky hair.\' The ghost devoted itself day and night to
straightening the hair. But how could it make a kinky hair straight? The
hair remained kinky.

\"Likewise, the ego seems to vanish this moment, but it reappears the
next. Unless one renounces the ego, one does not receive the grace of
God.

\"Suppose there is a feast in a house and the master of the house puts a
man in charge of the stores. As long as the man remains in the
store-room, the master doesn\'t go there; but when of his own wills he
renounces the store-room and goes away, then the master locks it and
takes charge of it himself.

\"A guardian is appointed only for a minor. A boy cannot safeguard his
property; therefore the king assumes responsibility for him. God does
not take over our responsibilities unless we renounce our ego.

\"Once Lakshmi and Narayana were seated in Vaikuntha, when Narayana
suddenly stood up. Lakshmi had been stroking His feet. She said, \'Lord,
where are You going?\' Narayana answered: \'One of My devotees is in
great danger. I must save him.\' With these words He went out. But He
came back immediately. Lakshmi said, \'Lord, why have You returned so
soon?\' Narayana smiled and said: The devotee was going along the road
overwhelmed with love for Me. Some washermen were drying clothes on the
grass, and the devotee walked over the clothes. At this the washermen
chased him and were going to beat him with their sticks. So I ran out to
protect him.\' \'But why have You come back?\' asked Lakshmi. Narayana
laughed and said: \'I saw the devotee himself picking up a brick to
throw at them. (All laugh.) So I came back.\'

\"I said to Keshab, \'You must renounce your ego.\' Keshab replied, \'If
I do, how can I keep my organization together?\'

\"I said to him: \'how slow you are to understand! I am not asking you
to renounce the \"ripe ego\", the ego that makes a man feel he is a
servant of God or His devotee. Give up the \"unripe ego\", the ego that
creates attachment to \"woman and gold\". The ego that makes a man feels
he is God\'s servant. His child is the \"ripe ego\". It doesn\'t harm
one.\'\"

TRAILOKYA: \"It is very difficult to get rid of the ego. People only
think they are free from it.\"

MASTER: \"Gauri would not refer to himself as \'I\' lest he should feel
egotistic. He would say \'this\' instead. I followed his example and
would refer to myself as \'this\' instead of \'I\'. Instead of saying,
\'I have eaten,\' I would say, \'This has eaten.\' Mathur noticed it and
said one day: \'What is this, revered father? Why should you talk that
way? Let them talk that way. They have their egotism. You are free from
it; you don\'t have to talk like them.\'

\"I said to Keshab, \'Since the ego cannot be given up, let it remain as
the servant, the servant of God.\' Prahlada had two moods. Sometimes he
would feel that he was God. In that mood he would say, \'Thou art verily
I, and I am verily Thou.\' But when he was conscious of his ego, he felt
that God was the Master and he was His servant. After a man is firmly
established in the ideal of \'I am He\', he can live as God\'s servant.
He may then think of himself as the servant of God.

**Signs of God-realization**

(To Captain) \"When a man attains the Knowledge of Brahman he shows
certain characteristics. The Bhagavata describes four of them: the state
of a child, of an inert thing, of a madman, and of a ghoul. Sometimes
the knower of Brahman acts like a five-year-old child. Sometimes he acts
like a madman. Sometimes he remains like an inert thing. In this state
he cannot work; he renounces all action. You may say that jnanis like
Janaka were active. The truth is that people in olden times gave
responsibility to their subordinate officers and thus freed themselves
from worry. Further, at that time men possessed intense faith.\"

Sri Ramakrishna began to speak about the renunciation of action. But he
also said that those who felt they must do their duties should do them
in a detached spirit.

MASTER: \"After attaining Knowledge one cannot do much work.\"

TRAILOKYA: \"Why so, sir? Pavahari Baba was a great yogi and yet he
reconciled people\'s quarrels, even lawsuits.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, yes. That\'s true. Dr. Durgacharan was a great drunkard.
He used to drink twenty-four hours a day. But he was precise in his
actions; he did not make any mistake in treating his patients. There is
no harm in doing work after the attainment of bhakti. But it is very
hard. One needs intense *tapasya*.

\"It is God who does everything. We are His instruments. Some Sikhs said
to me in front of the Kāli temple, \'God is compassionate.\' I said,
\'to whom is He compassionate?\' \'Why, revered sir, to all of us\',
said the Sikhs. I said: \'We are His children. Does compassion to one\'s
own children mean much? A father must look after his children; or do you
expect the people of the neighbourhood to bring them up?\' Well, won\'t
those who say that God is compassionate ever understand that we are
God\'s children and not someone else\'s?\"

CAPTAIN: \"You are right. They don\'t regard God as their own.\"

MASTER: \"Should we not, then, address God as compassionate? Of course
we should, as long as we practise *sādhanā*. After realizing God, one
rightly feels that God is our Father or Mother. As long as we have not
realized God, we feel that we are far away from Him, children of someone
else.

\"During the stage of *sādhanā* one should describe God by all His
attributes. One day Hazra said to Narendra: \'God is Infinity. Infinite
is His, splendour. Do you think He will accept your offerings of sweets
and bananas or listen to your music? This is a mistaken notion of
yours.\' Narendra at once sank ten fathoms. So I said to Hazra, \'you
villain! Where will these youngsters be if you talk to them like that?\'
How can a man live if he gives up devotion? No doubt God has infinite
splendour; yet He is under the control of His devotees. A rich man\'s
gate-keeper comes to the parlour where his master is seated with his
friends. He stands on one side of the room. In his hand he has something
covered with a cloth. He is very hesitant. The master asks him, \'Well,
gate-keeper, what have you in your hand?\' Very hesitantly the servant
takes out a custard-apple from under the cover, places it in front of
his master, and says, \'Sir, it is my desire that you should eat this.\'
The Master is impressed by his servant\'s devotion with great love he
takes the fruit in his hand and says: \'Ah! This is a very nice
custard-apple. Where did you pick it? You must have taken a great deal
of trouble to get it.\'

\"God is under the control of His devotees. King Duryodhana was very
attentive to Krishna and said to Him, \'Please have your meal here.\'
But the Lord went to Vidura\'s hut. He is very fond of His devotees. He
ate Vidura\'s simple rice and greens as if they were celestial food.

\"Sometimes a perfect Jnāni behaves like a ghoul. He does not
discriminate about food and drink, holiness and unholiness. A perfect
knower of God and a perfect idiot have the same outer signs. A perfect
Jnāni perhaps does not utter the mantras while bathing in the Ganges.
While worshipping, God, perhaps he offers all the flowers together at
His feet. He doesn\'t utter the mantras, nor does he observe the
rituals.

\"A man cannot renounce action as long as he desires worldly enjoyment.
As long as one cherishes a desire for enjoyment, one performs action.

\"A bird sat absent-mindedly on the mast of a ship anchored in the
Ganges. Slowly the ship sailed out into the ocean. When the bird came to
its senses, it could find no shore in any direction. It flew toward the
north hoping to reach land; it went very far and grew very tired but
could find no shore. What could it do? It returned to the ship and sat
on the mast. After a long while the bird flew away again, this time
toward the east. It couldn\'t find land in that direction either;
everywhere it saw nothing but limitless ocean. Very tired, it again
returned to the ship and sat on the mast. After resting a long while,
the bird went toward the south and toward the west. When it found no
sign of land in any direction, it came back and settled down on the
mast. It did not leave the mast again, but sat there without making any
further effort. It no longer felt restless or worried. Because it was
free from worry, it made no further effort.\"

CAPTAIN: \"Ah, what an illustration!\"

**Man\'s peace in God**

MASTER: \"Worldly people wander about to the four quarters of the earth
for the sake of happiness. They don\'t find it anywhere; they only
become tired and weary. When through their attachment to \'woman and
gold\' they only suffer misery, they feel an urge toward dispassion and
renunciation. Most people cannot renounce \'woman and gold\' without
first enjoying it.

There are two sorts of people: those who stay in one place and those who
go about to many places. There are some sadhakas who visit many sacred
places. They cannot settle down in one spot; they must drink the water
of many holy places. Thus roaming about, they satisfy their unfulfilled
desires. And at last they build a hut in one place and settle down
there. Then, free from worry and effort, they meditate on God.

\"But what is there to enjoy in the world? \'Woman and gold\'? That is
only a momentary pleasure. One moment it exists and the next moment it
disappears. \'

**Sincere yearning enables one to realize God**

\"The world is like an overcast sky that steadily pours down rain: the
face of the sun is seldom seen. There is mostly suffering in the world.
On account of the cloud of \'woman and gold\' one cannot see the sun.
Some people ask me: \'Sir, why has God created such a world? Is there no
way out for us?\' I say to them: \'why shouldn\'t there be a way out?
Take shelter with God and pray to Him with a yearning heart for a
favourable wind, that you may have things in your favour. If you call on
Him with yearning, He will surely listen to you.\'

\"A man had a son who was on the point of death. In frenzy he asked
remedies of different people. One of them said:\' \'Here is a remedy:
First it must rain when the star *Svati* is in the ascendant; then some
of the rain must fall into a skull; then a frog must come there to drink
the water, and a snake must chase it; and when the snake is about to
bite the frog, the frog must hop away and the poison must fall into the
skull. You should give the patient a little of the poison and rain-water
from the skull.\' The father set out eagerly to find the medicine when
the star Svati was in the sky. It started raining. Fervently he said to
God, \'O Lord, please get a skull for me.\' Searching here and there, he
at last found a skull with rain-water in it. Again he prayed to God,
saying, \'O Lord, I beseech Thee, please help me find the frog and the
snake.\' Since he had great longing, he got the frog and the snake also.
In the twinkling of an eye he saw a snake chasing a frog, and as it was
about to bite the frog, its poison fell into the skull.

\"If one takes shelter with God and prays to Him with great longing, God
will surely listen; He will certainly make everything favourable.\"

CAPTAIN: \"What an apt illustration!\"

MASTER: \"Yes, God makes everything favourable. Perhaps the aspirant
Doesn\'t marry. Thus he is able to devote his whole attention to God. Or
perhaps his brothers earn the family\'s livelihood. Or perhaps a son
takes on the responsibilities of the family. Then the aspirant will not
have to bother about the world; he can give one hundred per cent of his
mind to God.

\"But one cannot succeed unless one renounces \'woman and gold\'. Only
by renunciation is ignorance destroyed. The sun\'s rays, falling on a
lens, burn many objects. But if a room is dark inside, you cannot get
that result: \'you must come out of the room to use the lens.

\"But some people live in the world even after attaining jnāna. They see
both what is inside and what is outside the room. The light of God
illumines the world. Therefore with that light they can discriminate
between good and bad, permanent and impermanent. The ignorant, who lead
a worldly life without knowing God, are like people living in a house
with mud walls.

With the help of a dim light they can see the inside of the house but
nothing more. But those who live in the world after having attained
Knowledge and realized God, are like people living in a glass house.
They see the inside of the room and also all that is outside. The light
from the sun of Knowledge enters strongly into the room. They perceive
everything inside the room very clearly. They know what is good and what
is bad, what is permanent and what is impermanent.

\"God alone is the Doer, and we are all His instruments. Therefore it is
impossible even for a Jnāni to be egotistic. The writer of a hymn to
Śiva felt proud of his achievement; but his pride was dashed to pieces
when

Śiva\'s bull bared his teeth. He saw that each tooth was a word of the
hymn. Do you understand the meaning of this? These words had existed
from the beginning less past. The writer had only discovered them.

\"It is not good to be a guru by profession. One cannot be a teacher
without a command from God. He who says he is a guru is a man of mean
intelligence. Haven\'t you seen a balance? The lighter side goes higher.
He who is spiritually higher than others does not consider himself a
guru. Everyone wants to be a teacher, but a disciple is hard to find.\"

Trailokya was seated on the floor, to the north of the small couch. He
was going to sing. Sri Ramakrishna said to him, \"Ah, how sweetly you
sing!\"

Trailokya sang to the accompaniment of a Tānpura:

> *I have joined my heart to Thee: all that exists art Thou;*
>
> *Thee only have I found, for Thou art all that exists.*
>
> *O Lord, Beloved of my heart! Thou art the Home of all;*
>
> *Where indeed is the heart in which Thou dost not dwell?*
>
> *Thou hast entered every heart: all that exists art Thou.*
>
> *Whether sage or fool, whether Hindu or Mussalman,*
>
> *Thou makest them as Thou wilt: all that exists art Thou.*
>
> *Thy presence is everywhere, whether in heaven or in Kaaba;*
>
> *Before Thee all must bow, for Thou art all that exists.*
>
> *From earth below to the highest heaven, from heaven to deepest
> earth,*
>
> *I see Thee wherever I look: all that exists art Thou. Pondering, I
> have understood; I have seen it beyond a doubt; I find not a single
> thing that may be compared to Thee. To Jafar it has been revealed that
> Thou art all that exists.*

He sang again:

> *Thou art my All in All, O lord! the Life of my life, the Essence of
> essence;*
>
> *In the three worlds I have none else but Thee to call my own.*
>
> *Thou art my peace, my joy, my hope;*
>
> *Thou my support, my wealth, my glory;*
>
> *Thou art my wisdom and my strength.*
>
> *Thou art my home, my place of rest; my dearest friend, my next of
> kin;*
>
> *My present and my future,*
>
> *Thou; my heaven and my salvation.*
>
> *Thou art my scriptures, my commandments;*
>
> *Thou art my ever gracious Guru;*
>
> *Thou the Spring of my boundless bliss.*
>
> *Thou art the Way, and Thou the Goal;*
>
> *Thou the Adorable One, O Lord!*
>
> *Thou art the Mother tender-hearted;*
>
> *Thou the chastising Father;*
>
> *Thou the Creator and Protector;*
>
> *Thou the Helmsman who dost steer*
>
> *My craft across the sea of life.*

While Sri Ramakrishna listened to the songs he was overwhelmed with
emotion. Again and again he said: \"Ah, Thou art all! Ah me! Ah me!\"

\"The music was over. It was six o\'clock in the evening. Sri
Ramakrishna went to the pine-grove, M.

accompanying him. Sri Ramakrishna was laughing and talking.

Suddenly he said to M.: \"Why haven\'t you eaten any refreshments? Why
haven\'t the others eaten either?\" He was eager for the devotees to
take some refreshments.

Sri Ramakrishna was to go to Calcutta in the evening. While returning
from the pine-grove he said to M., \"I don\'t know who will take me to
Calcutta in his carriage.\"

It was evening. A lamp was lighted in Sri Ramakrishna\'s room and
incense was burnt. Lamps also were lighted in the different temples and
buildings. The orchestra was playing in the Nahabat. Soon the evening
service would begin in the temples.

Sri Ramakrishna sat on the small couch. After chanting the names of the
different deities, he meditated on the Divine Mother. The evening
service was over. Sri Ramakrishna paced the room, now and then talking
to the devotees. He also consulted M. about his going to Calcutta.

Presently Narendra arrived. He was accompanied by Sarat and one or two
other young devotees. They all saluted the Master.

At the sight of Narendra Sri Ramakrishna\'s love overflowed. He tenderly
touched Narendra\'s chin as one touches a baby\'s to show one\'s love.
He said in a loving voice, \"Ah, you have come!\"

The Master was standing in his room, facing the Ganges. Narendra and his
young friends were talking to him, facing the east. The Master turned
toward M. and said: \"Narendra has come. How can I go to Calcutta now? I
sent for Narendra. How can I go now? What do you think?\"

M: \"As you wish, sir. Let us put it off today.\"

MASTER: \"All right. We shall go tomorrow, either by boat or by
carriage. (To the other devotees) It is late. Go home now.\"

One by one the devotees saluted him and departed.

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 42**

CAR FESTIVAL AT BALARĀM\'S HOUSE

> Monday, July 13, 1885
>
> SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in Balarām\'s drawing-room with the
> devotees. It was nine o\'clock in the
>
> morning. Balarām was going to celebrate the Car Festival the following
> day. The Deity Jagannath was
>
> worshipped daily at his house. He had a small car which would be drawn
> along the verandah to celebrate the
>
> festival. The Master had been specially invited for the occasion.
>
> Sri Ramakrishna and M. were talking together. Narayan, Tejchandra,
> Balarām, and other devotees were in the room. The Master was talking
> about Purna, a lad of fifteen. He was very eager to see the boy.
>
> MASTER (to M.): Well, by which road will he come to see me? Please
> have Purna and Dwija meet each other. \"When two people are of the
> same age and have the same inner nature, I bring them together. There
> is a meaning in this. In this way both make progress. Have you noticed
> Purna\'s longing for God?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. One day I was riding on a tram. He saw me from the room
    of his house and ran down to the street. With great fervour he
    saluted me from the street.\"

> MASTER (with tears in his eyes): \"Ah! Ah! It is because you have
> helped him make the contact through which he will find out the supreme
> ideal of his life. One doesn\'t act like that unless one longs for
> God.
>
> \"Narendra, the younger Naren, and Purna-these three have a manly
> nature. It is not so with Bhavanāth. He has a womanly nature.
>
> **Master on Purna**
>
> \"Purna is in such an exalted state that either he will very soon give
> up his body-the body is useless after the realization of God-or his
> inner nature will within a few days burst forth.
>
> **Purna\'s divine traits**
>
> \"He has a divine nature-the traits of a god. It makes a person less
> fearful of men. If you put a garland of flowers round his neck or
> smear his body with sandal-paste or burn incense before him, he will
> go into samādhi; for then he will know beyond the shadow of a doubt
> that Narayana Himself dwells in his body, that it is Narayana who has
> assumed the body. I have come to know about it.
>
> A few days after my first experience of the God-intoxicated state at
> Dakshineswar, a lady of a brahmin family arrived there. She had many
> good traits. No sooner was a garland put round her neck and incense
> burnt before her than she went into samādhi. A few moments later she
> experienced great bliss; tears streamed from her eyes. I saluted her
> and said, \'Mother, shall I succeed?\' \'Yes\', she replied.
>
> \"I want to see Purna once more. But how will it be possible for me?
> It seems he is a part. How amazing! Not a mere particle, but a part
> very intelligent, too. I understand that he is very clever in his
> studies. Therefore I have hit it right.
>
> \"By dint of austerity, a man, may obtain God as his son. By the
> roadside on the way to Kamarpukur is Ranjit Raya\'s lake. Bhagavati,
> the Divine Mother, was born as his daughter. Even now people hold an
> annual festival there in the month of Chaitra, in honour of this
> divine daughter. I feel very much like going there.
>
> **Story of Ranjit Raya**
>
> \"Ranjit Raya was the landlord of that part of the country. Through
> the power of his *tapasya* he obtained the Divine Mother as his
> daughter. He was very fond of her, and she too was much attached to
> him; she hardly left his presence. One day Ranjit Raya was engaged in
> the duties of his estate. He was very busy. The girl,

with her childlike nature, was constantly interrupting him, saying:
\'Father, what is this? What is that?\' Ranjit Raya tried, with sweet
words, to persuade her not to disturb him, and said: \'my child, please
leave me alone. I have much work to do.\' But the girl would not go
away. At last, absent-mindedly, the father said, \'Get out of here!\' On
this pretext she left home. A pedlar of conch-shell articles was going
along the road. From him she took a pair of bracelets for her wrists.
When he asked for the price, she said that he could get the money from a
certain box in her home. Then she disappeared. Nobody saw her again. In
the mean time the pedlar came to the house and asked for the price of
his bracelets. When she was not to be found at home, her relatives began
to run about looking for her. Ranjit Raya sent people in all directions
to search for her. The money owed to the pedlar was found in the box, as
she had indicated. Ranjit Raya was weeping bitterly, when people came
running to him and said that they had noticed something in the lake.
They all ran there and saw an arm, with conch-shell bracelets on the
wrist, being waved above the water. A moment afterwards it disappeared.
Even now people worship her as the Divine Mother at the time of the
annual festival. (To M.) All this is true.

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Narendra now believes these things.

\"Purna was born with an element of Vishnu. I worshipped him mentally
with bel-leaves; but the offering was not accepted. Then I worshipped
him with tulsi-leaves and sandal-paste. That proved to be all right. God
reveals Himself in many ways: sometimes as man, sometimes in other
divine forms made of Spirit. One must believe in divine forms. What do
you say?\"

M: \"It is true, sir!\"

**Gopal Ma**

MASTER: \"The brahmani of Kamarhati sees many visions. She lives all by
herself in a lonely room in a garden on the bank of the Ganges. She
spends her time in japa. Gopala with her. (The Master gives a start.) It
is not imagination, but fact. She saw that Gopala\'s palms were red. He
walks with her. She suckles Him at her breast. They talk to each other.
When Narendra heard the story he wept. Formerly I too used to see many
visions, but now in my ecstatic state I don\'t see so many. I am
gradually getting over my feminine nature; I feel nowadays more like a
man. Therefore I control my emotion; I don\'t manifest it outwardly so
much.

\"The younger Naren has the nature of a man. Therefore in meditation his
mind completely merges in the Ideal. He does not show emotion.
Nitya-gopal has a feminine nature. Therefore while he is in a spiritual
mood his body becomes distorted and twisted; it becomes flushed.

(To M.) \"Well, people renounce grain by grain, but what a mood these
youngsters are in!

\"Binode said: \'I have to sleep with my wife. That makes me feel very
bad.\' It is bad for an aspirant to sleep with his wife, whether he has
intercourse with her or not. There is the friction of the body and also
the physical warmth.

\"What a state Dwija is passing through! In my presence he only sways
his body and fixes his glance on me. Is that a trifling thing? If a man
gathers his whole, mind and fixes it on me, then, indeed, he achieves
everything.

**God dwelling in the Master**

\"But what am I? It is all He. I am the machine and He is its Operator.
It is God alone who exists in this \[meaning his body\]. That is why so
many people are feeling more and more attracted to it. A mere touch is
enough to awaken their spirituality. This attraction, these pull, is the
attraction of God and of none else.

\"Tārak of Belgharia was going home from Dakshineswar. I dearly noticed
that a flame-like thing came out of this \[meaning his body\] and
followed him. A few days later Tārak came back to Dakshineswar. In a
state of samādhi He Who dwells in this body placed his foot on Tārak\'s
chest.

\"Well, are there more youngsters like these?\"

1.  \"Mohit is very nice. He came to you once or twice. He is studying
    enough books to pass two university examinations. He has great
    longing for God.\"

MASTER: \"That maybe. But he doesn\'t belong to a high plane. His
physical traits are not so good; he has a puggish face. But these other
youngsters belong to a high plane.

**Worries associated with human birth**

\"Many troubles and worries follow in the wake of a birth in a physical
body. Further, if a person is cursed, he may have to be born seven
times. One must be very careful. One has to assume a human body if one
cherishes the slightest desire.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"What are the desires of those who are Incarnations of
God?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"I find that I have not got rid of all my desires.
Once I saw a holy man with a shawl, and I too wanted to put on one like
it. Even now I have that desire. I don\'t know whether I shall have to
be born again for it.\"

BALARĀM (smiling): \"Then will you be born again just for a shawl?\"
(All laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): \"One has to keep a good desire so that one may give
up the body meditating on it. There are four holy places for the sādhus
to visit. They visit three and leave out one. Many of them leave out
Puri, the place of Jagannath, so that they can give up their bodies
meditating on Jagannath.\"

A man dressed in an ochre robe entered the room and greeted the Master.
Privately he was in the habit of criticizing Sri Ramakrishna; so at the
sight of him Balarām laughed. Sri Ramakrishna could read a man\'s mind.
He said to Balarām: \"Never mind. Let him say I am a cheat.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was talking to Tejchandra.

MASTER: \"I send for you so often. Why don\'t you come? If you practise
meditation and prayer it will make me happy. I look on you as my own;
that is why I send for you.\"

TEJCHANDRA: \"Sir, I have to go to the office. I am very busy with my
duties.\"

M. (smiling): \"There was a marriage ceremony at his home and he got
leave from his office for ten days.\"

MASTER: \"Well, well! You say you have no leisure. You told me just now
that you were going to renounce the world.\"

NARAYAN: \"M. said to us one day that this world, is a wilderness.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"Please tell them that story of the disciple who became
unconscious after taking the medicine. His teacher arrived at the house
and said he would revive if someone else swallowed a pill that he would
prescribe. The disciple would get back his life, but the man who,
swallowed the pill would die.

\"Please tell the other one, too, of the hathayogi who thought that his
wife and children were his very own, and who feigned death with his
limbs stretched out. It will do them good to hear those stories.\"

It was noon. Sri Ramakrishna partook of the food that had been offered
to the Family Deity, Jagannath. The Master often used to say that the
food at Balarām\'s house was very pure. Afterwards he rested awhile.

Late in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna sat with the devotees in the
drawing-room of Balarām\'s house. Chandra

Babu, of the Kartabhaja sect, and a witty brahmin were there. The
brahmin was something of a buffoon; his words made everybody laugh.

About six o\'clock Girish\'s brother Atul and Tejchandra\'s brother
arrived. Sri Ramakrishna was in samādhi. A few minutes later he said,
still in theecstatic mood: \"Can one become unconscious by meditating on
Conscious-ness? Can one lose one\'s mind by thinking of God? God is of
the very nature of Knowledge; He is of the very nature of Eternity,
Purity, and Consciousness.

Sri Ramakrishna said to the witty brahmin: \"Why do you waste your time
with these frivolous jokes about insignificant worldly things? Direct
your mind to God. If a man can calculate about salt, he can also
calculate about sugar candy.\"

BRAHMIN (smiling): \"Please attract me.\"

MASTER: \"What can I do? Everything depends on your effort. Your mind is
your own. Give up this trifling buffoonery and go forward toward God.
You can go farther and farther along that way. The brahmachari asked the
wood-cutter to go forward. At first the wood-cutter found a sandal-wood
forest; next, a silver-mine; next, a gold-mine; and then gems and
diamonds.\"

BRAHMIN: \"There is no end to this path.\"

MASTER: \"Where you find peace, there is the end.\"

About a new visitor Sri Ramakrishna said: \"I didn\'t find any substance
in him. He seemed worthless.\"

It was dusk. Lamps were lighted in the room. Sri Ramakrishna was
meditating on the Divine Mother and chanting Her name in his melodious
voice. The devotees sat around him. Since Balarām was going to celebrate
the Car Festival at his house the following day, Sri Ramakrishna
intended to spend the night there.

After taking some refreshments in the inner apartments, Sri Ramakrishna
returned to the parlour. It was about ten o\'dock. The Master said to
M., \"Please bring my towel from the other room.\" A bed was made for
Sri Ramakrishna in the adjoining small room. About half past ten Sri
Ramakrishna lay down to sleep. It was summertime. He said to M., \"You
had better bring a fan.\" He asked the disciple to fan him. At midnight
Sri Ramakrishna woke up. He said to M., \"Don\'t fan me any more; I feel
chilly.\"

**Tuesday, July 14, 1885**

It was the day of the Car Festival. Sri Ramakrishna left his bed very
early in the morning. He was alone in the room, dancing and chanting the
name of God. M. entered and saluted the Master. Other devotees arrived
one by one. They saluted the Master and took seats near him. Sri
Ramakrishna was longing intensely for Purna. He was talking to M. about
him.

MASTER: \"Did you give Purna any instruction?\"

1.  \"I asked him to read the life of Chaitanya. He is familiar with the
    incidents of his life. I told him further that you ask people to
    stick to the truth.\"

MASTER: \"How did he take it when you said about me, \'He is an
Incarnation of God\'?\"

1.  \"I said to him, \'Come with me If you want to see a person like
    Chaitanya.\'\" MASTER: \"Anything else?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Also that remark of yours that when an elephant enters a small
    pool there is a great splashing of water all around; likewise, in
    the case of a \'small receptacle\', emotion overflows. \"About his
    giving up of fish, I said to him: \'Why have you done that? Your
    family will make a great fuss about it.\' \"

MASTER: \"That\'s good. One should keep one\'s feelings and emotions to
oneself.\"

It was about half past six in the morning. M. was going to bathe in the
Ganges, when suddenly tremors of an earthquake were felt. At once he
returned to Sri Ramakrishna\'s room. The Master stood in the drawing
room. The devotees stood around him. They were talking about the
earthquake. The shaking had been rather violent, and many of the
devotees were frightened.

M: \"You should all have gone downstairs.\"

MASTER: \"Such is the fate of the house under whose roof one lives; and
still people are so egotistic. (To M.) Do you remember the great storm
of the month of Āświn?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. I was very young at that time-nine or ten years old. I
    was alone in a room while the storm was raging, and I prayed to
    God.\"

M. was surprised and said to himself: \"Why did the Master suddenly ask
me about the great storm of Āświn? Does he know that I was alone at that
time earnestly praying to God with tears in my eyes? Does he know all
this? Has he been protecting me as my guru since my very birth?\"

MASTER: \"It was quite late in the day at Dakshineswar when the storm
broke, but somehow they managed to cook the meals. The trees were
uprooted. You see, this is the fate of the house one lives in.

**Nitya and Lila**

\"But when one attains Perfect Knowledge, then one finds that dying and
killing are one and the same thing; that is to say, both are unreal.
When one is dead, one has not really died; and when one has killed
another, the man is not really dead. Both the Lila and the Nitya belong
to the same Reality. In one form It is the Absolute, and in another, the
Lila . Even though the Lila is destroyed, the Nitya always exists. Water
is water, whether it is still or in waves; it is the same water when the
waves quiet down.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sat in the drawing-room with the devotees. Mahendra
Mukherji, Hari, the younger Naren, and many other devotees were there.
Hari lived alone and studied Vedānta. He was about twenty-three years
old, and unmarried. Sri Ramakrishna was very fond of him. He wanted Hari
to visit him frequently. But since Hari loved solitude he did not often
come to the Master.

MASTER (to Hari): \"Well, I haven\'t seen you for a long time.\"

**Essence of Vedānta & Absolute and Relative are correlatives**

\"You see, in one form He is the Absolute and in another He is the
Relative. What does Vedānta teach? Brahman alone is real and the world
illusory. Isn\'t that so? But as long as God keeps the \'ego of a
devotee\' in a man, the Relative is also real. When He completely
effaces the ego, then what is remains. That cannot be described by the
tongue. But as long as God keeps the ego, one must accept all. By
removing the outer sheaths of the plantain-tree, you reach the inner
pith. As long as the tree contains sheaths, it also contains pith. So
too, as long as it contains pith, it also contains sheaths. The pith
goes with the sheaths and the sheaths go with the pith. In the same way,
when you speak of the Nitya, it is understood that the Lila also exists;
and when you speak of the Lila, it is understood that the Nitya also
exists.

**Brahman and Śakti**

\"It is He alone who has become the universe, living beings, and
thetwenty-four cosmic principles. When He is action less, I call Him
Brahman; when He creates, preserves, and destroys, I call Him Śakti.
Brahman and Śakti are not different from each other. Water is water,
whether it is still or moving.

\"It is not possible to rid oneself of \'I-consciousness\'. and as long
as one is aware of this \'I-consciousness\', one cannot speak of the
universe and its living beings as unreal. You cannot get the correct
weight of the bel-fruit if you leave out its shell and pits.

\"The brick, lime, and brick-dust of which the stairs are made are the
same brick, lime, and brick-dust of which the roof is made. The universe
and its living beings exist on account of the Reality of Him who is
known as Brahman.

**Synthesis of the formless Reality and God with form**

\"The devotees-I mean the vijnanis-accept both God with form and the
Formless, both the Personal God and the Impersonal. In a shoreless
ocean-an infinite expanse of water-visible blocks of ice are formed here
and there by intense cold. Similarly, under the cooling influence, so to
say, of the deep love of Its worshipper, the Infinite reduces Itself to
the finite and appears before the worshipper as God with form. Again,
as, on the rising of the sun, the ice melts away, so, on the awakening
of Knowledge, God with form melts away into the same Infinite and
Formless.

\"As long as a man analyses with the mind, he cannot reach the Absolute.
As long as you reason with your mind, you have no way of getting rid of
the universe and the objects of the senses-form, taste, smell, touch,
and sound. When reasoning stops, you attain the Knowledge of Brahman.
Ātman cannot be realized through this mind; Ātman is realized through
Ātman alone. Pure Mind, Pure Buddhi, Pure Ātman-all these are one and
the same.

\"Just think how many things you need to perceive an object. You need
eyes; you need light; you need mind. You cannot perceive the object if
you leave out anyone of these three. As long as the mind functions how
can you say that the universe and the \'I\' do not exist?

\"When the mind is annihilated, when it stops deliberating pro and con,
then one goes into samādhi, one attains the Knowledge of Brahman. You
know the seven notes of the scale: sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, ni. One
cannot keep one\'s voice on \'ni\' very long.\"

**Intimate Knowledge of God**

Looking at the younger Naren, Sri Ramakrishna said: \"What will you gain
by merely being intuitively aware of God\'s existence? A mere vision of
God is by no means everything. You have to bring Him into your room. You
have to talk to Him.

\"Some have heard of milk, some have seen milk, and some have drunk
milk. Some have seen the king, but only one or two can bring the King
home and entertain him.\"

M. went to the Ganges to take his bath. It was ten o\'clock. Sri
Ramakrishna was still talking with the devotees.

After finishing his bath, M. returned to Balarām\'s house. He saluted
the Master and sat down near him.

Sri Ramakrishna was filled with intense spiritual fervour. Words of
wisdom flowed from him. Now and then he narrated his profound mystical
experiences to the devotees.

**Master\'s spiritual experiences**

MASTER: \"I went to Benares with Mathur Babu. Our boat was passing the
Manikarnika Ghat on the Ganges, when suddenly I had a vision of Śiva. I
stood near the edge of the boat and went into samādhi. The boatman,
fearing that I might fall into the water, cried to Hriday: \'Catch hold
of him! Catch hold of him!\' I saw Śiva standing on that Ghat, embodying
in Himself all the seriousness of the world. At first I saw Him standing
at a distance; then I saw Him approaching me. At last he merged in me.

\"Another time, in an ecstatic mood, I saw that a sannyāsi was leading
me by the hand. We entered a temple and I had a vision of Annapurna made
of gold.

\"God alone has become all this; but He manifests Himself more in
certain things than in others.

(To M.) \"Perhaps you do not believe in the salagram. \'Englishmen\' do
not believe in it. It doesn\'t matter whether you believe in it or not.
A salagram should contain the mark of a disc and other signs; only then
can it be worshipped as an emblem of God.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. It is like the fuller manifestation of God in a man with
good physical traits.\' \"

MASTER: \"At first Narendra used to say that these were figments of my
imagination; but now he accepts everything.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was describing the vision of God, when he went into
samādhi. The devotees looked at him with fixed gaze. After a long time
he regained consciousness of the world and talked to the devotees.

MASTER (to M.): \"What do you think I saw? I saw the whole universe as a
salagram, and in it I saw your two eyes.\"

In silent wonder M. and the devotees listened to these words about his
inner experience. At this moment Sarada, another\' young disciple of the
Master, entered the room and saluted him.

MASTER (to Sarada): \"Why don\'t you come to Dakshineswar? Why don\'t
you see me when I come to Calcutta? \"

SARADA: \"Nobody tells me about it.\"

MASTER: \"Next time I shall let you know. (To M., smiling) Make a list
of these youngsters.\" (M. and the devotees laugh.)

SARADA: \"My relatives at home want me to marry. (pointing to M.) How
many times he has scolded me about marriage!\"

MASTER: \"Why should you marry just now? (To M.) Sarada is now in a very
good state of mind. Formerly he had a hesitant look; now his face beams
with joy.\"

Sri Ramakrishna said to a devotee, \"Will you kindly fetch Purna?\"

Narendra arrived. Sri Ramakrishna asked a devotee to give him some
refreshments. He was greatly pleased at the sight of Narendra. When he
fed Narendra, he felt that he was feeding Narayana Himself. He stroked
Narendra\'s body affectionately.

**Spiritual fervour of Gopal Ma**

Gopal Ma entered the room. She was a great devotee of Gopala and was
blessed with many lofty spiritual visions. Sri Ramakrishna had asked
Balarām to send a man to bring her from Kamarhati. As soon as she
entered the room she said, \"I am shedding tears of joy.\" With these
words she bowed before the Master, touching the ground with her
forehead.

MASTER: \"What is this? You address me as \'Gopala\' and still you
salute me! Now go into the inner apartments and cook some curry for me.
Put some spicy seasoning in it so that I may get the smell from here.\"
(All laugh.

GOPAL MA: \"What will they \[meaning the members of the household\]
think of me?\"

Before she left the room she said to Narendra in a very fervent voice,
\"My child, have I reached the goal, or have I farther to go?\"

It was the day of the Car Festival; so there was some delay in the
worship of the Family Deity. When the worship was finished Sri
Ramakrishna was asked to have his meal. He went to the inner apartments.
The woman devotees were anxious to see him.

**Man and woman devotees**

Sri Ramakrishna had many woman devotees, but he did not talk much about
them to his man devotees. He would warn the men against visiting woman
devotees. He would say: \"Don\'t overdo it. Otherwise you will slip.\"
To some of his man devotees he would say, \"Don\'t go near a woman even
if she rolls on the ground with

devotion.\" The Master wanted the men to live apart from woman devotees;
only thus would the two groups make progress. He did not like the woman
devotees to caress the men as \"Gopala\"; for too much of this motherly
affection was not good; it degenerated in time into a harmful
relationship.

After his midday meal Sri Ramakrishna sat in the drawing-room with the
devotees. It was one o\'clock. A devotee brought Purna from his home.
With great joy the Master exclaimed to M.: \"Here he is! Purna has
come.\" Narendra, the younger Naren, Narayan, Haripada, and other
devotees were talking with the Master.

**Free will**

THE YOUNGER NAREN: \"Sir, have we any free will?\"

MASTER: \"Just try to find out who this \'I\' is. While you are
searching for \'I\', \'He\' comes out. \'I am the machine and He is the
Operator.\' You have heard of a mechanical toy that goes into a store
with a letter in its hand. You are like that toy. God alone is the Doer.
Do your duties in the world as if you were the doer, but knowing all the
time that God alone is the Doer and you are the instrument.

\"As long as the *Upādhi* exists there is ignorance. \'I am a scholar\',
\'I am a Jnāni\', \'I am wealthy\', \'I am honourable\', \'I am the
master, father, and teacher\' -all these ideas are begotten of
ignorance. \'I am the machine and You are the Operator\' - that is
Knowledge. In the state of Knowledge all *Upādhis* are destroyed. When
the log is burnt up entirely, there is no more sound; no heat either.
Everything cools down. Peace! Peace! Peace! (To Narendra) Sing a
little.\"

NARENDRA \"I must go home. I have many things to do.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, yes, my child! Why should you listen to us? \'The words
of those who have gold in their ears are valuable; no one listens to him
who hasn\'t even a rag round his waist.\' (All laugh.) You frequent the
garden house of the Guhas. I always hear about it. Whenever I ask,
\'Where is Narendra today?\' I am told, \'Oh, he has gone to the
Guhas.\' I should not have said all these things, but you have wrung
them out of me.\"

Narendra kept quiet a few moments. Then he said: \"There are no
instruments to accompany me. Shall I just sing?\"

MASTER: \"My child, this is all we have. Please sing if it suits you.
You must know how Balarām arranges things. \"Balarām says to me,
\'Please come to Calcutta by boat; take a carriage only if you must.\'
(All laugh.) You see, he has given us a feast today; so this afternoon
he will make us all dance! (All laugh.) One day he hired a carriage for
me from here to Dakshineswar. He said that the carriage hire was twelve
*ānnās*. I said to him, \'Will the coachman take me to Dakshineswar for
twelve *ānnās*?\' \'Oh, that will be plenty\', he replied. One side of
the carriage broke down before we reached Dakshineswar. (All laugh.)
Besides, the horse stopped every now and then; it simply would not go.
Once in a while the coachman whipped the horse, and then it ran a short
distance. (All laugh.) The program for the evening is that Ram will play
on the drum and we shall all dance. Ram has no sense of rhythm. (All
laugh.) Anyhow, that is Balarām\'s attitude-sing yourselves, dance
yourselves, and make yourselves happy!\" (All laugh.)

Other devotees were arriving. Mahendra Mukherji saluted the Master from
a distance. The Master returned the salute. Then he salaamed to Mahendra
like a Musslman.

The Master said to a young devotee who sat next to him: \"Why don\'t you
tell him I have salaamed to him? He will appreciate it (All laugh.)

Many of the householder devotees were accompanied by their wives and
other woman relatives. They wanted

to salute the Master and watch his dancing before the car. Ram, Girish,
and other devotees gradually

assembled. Many young devotees were present.

Narendra sang:

> *Oh, when will dawn the blessed day*
>
> *When Love will waken in my heart?*
>
> *When will my tears flow uncontrolled*
>
> *As I repeat Lord Hari\'s name,*
>
> *And all my longing be fulfilled?*
>
> *When will my mind and soul be pure?*
>
> *Oh, when shall I at last repair*
>
> *Unto Vrindāvan\'s sacred groves?*
>
> *When will my worldly bonds fall off*
>
> *And my imperfect sight be healed*
>
> *By Wisdom\'s cool collyrium?*
>
> *When shall I learn true alchemy*
>
> *And, touching the Philosopher\'s Stone,*
>
> *Transmute my body\'s worthless iron*
>
> *Into the Spirit\'s purest gold?*
>
> *When shall I see this very world*
>
> *As God, and roll on Love\'s highway?*
>
> *When shall I give up piety*
>
> *And duty and the thought of caste?*
>
> *When shall I leave behind all fear,*
>
> *All shame, convention, worry, pride?*
>
> *Oh, I shall smear my body then*
>
> *With dust from the feet of devotees;*
>
> *Across my shoulders I shall sling*
>
> *Renunciation\'s pack, and drink*
>
> *From my two hands a cooling draught*
>
> *Of Jamunas life-renewing stream.*
>
> *Oh, then I shall be mad with love;*
>
> *I shall both laugh and weep for joy!*
>
> *Then I shall swim, upon the Sea,*
>
> *Of blessed Satchidananda;*
>
> *Drunk with His love, I shall make all*
>
> *As drunk as I! Oh, I shall sport*
>
> *At Hari\'s feet for evermore!*

He sang again:

> *In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles; Therefore
> the, yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave*

Balarām had arranged for kirtan with Vaishnavcharan, the musician
Vaishnavcharan sang:

> *O tongue, always repeat, the name of Mother Durga; Who but your
> Mother Durga will save you in distress? . . .*

When Sri Ramakrishna had heard a line or two of the song he went into
samādhi. He stood up in that ecstatic mood, The younger Naren supported
him. The Master\'s face was lighted with a smile. Gradually his body
became motionless; his mind appeared to have gone to another realm. All
the devotees in the room

looked at him in amazement. The woman devotees watched the scene from
behind the screen. After a long time he came down from samādhi, chanting
the holy name of God.

As the Master sat down, Vaishnavcharan sang again:

> *O vina, sing Lord Hari\'s name!*
>
> *Without the blessing of His feet*
>
> *You cannot know the final Truth,*
>
> *The name of Hari slays all grief:*
>
> *Sing Hari\'s name! Sing Krishna\'s name! . . .*

Then he sang:

> *O vina, forgetting to worship Hari,*
>
> *I pass the days of my life in vain. . . .*

**The Car Festival**

It was afternoon. In the mean time the small car of Jagannath, decorated
with flowers, flags, and bunting, had been brought to the inner
verandah. The images of Jagannath, Subhadra, and Balarama, were adorned
with sandal-paste, flower garlands, robes and jewelry. Sri Ramakrishna
left the room where the professional musicians were singing and came to
the verandah, accompanied by the devotees. He stood in front of the car
and pulled it by the rope. He began to sing and dance with the devotees
in front of the car.

The Master sang :

> *Behold, the two brothers have come, who weep*
>
> *while chanting Hari\'s name. . . .*

He sang again:

> *See how all Nadia is shaking*
>
> *Under the waves of Gaurānga\'s love! . . .*

The music and dancing went on in the verandah as the car was pulled to
and fro. A large crowd entered the house on hearing the loud music and
the beating of the drums. Sri Ramakrishna was completely intoxicated
with divine love. The devotees felt its contagion and danced with the
Master in an ecstasy of love.

Afterwards Sri Ramakrishna returned to the drawing-room. M. and other
devotees stroked his feet.

Filled with divine fervour, Narendra sang to the accompaniment of the
Tānpura:

> *Come! Come, Mother! Doll of my soul! My heart\'s\' Delight!*
>
> *In my heart\'s lotus come and sit, that I may see Thy face*

Then he sang:

> *Mother, Thou art our sole Redeemer,*
>
> *Thou the Support of the three Gunās,*
>
> *Higher than the most high.*
>
> *Thou art compassionate, I know;*
>
> *Who takest away our bitter grief.*
>
> *Sandhya art Thou, and Gayatri;*
>
> *Thou dost sustain this universe.*
>
> *Mother, the Help art Thou*
>
> *Of those that have no help but thee,*
>
> *O Eternal Beloved of Śiva!*
>
> *Thou art in earth, in water Thou;*
>
> *Thou liest at the root of all.*
>
> *In me, in every creature,*
>
> *Thou hast Thy home; though clothed with form,*
>
> *Yet art Thou formless Reality*

He sang another song:

> *I have made Thee, O Lord, the Pole-star of my life;*
>
> *No more shall I lose my way on the world\'s trackless sea. Wherever I
> wander here, Thy brilliance shines undimmed;*
>
> *With Thy serene and gracious light*
>
> *Thou drivest all the tears out of my troubled soul.*
>
> *In my heart\'s inmost shrine Thy face for ever beams;*
>
> *If, for a moment even, I cannot find it there,*
>
> *My soul is overwhelmed with woe;*
>
> *And when my witless mind strays from the thought of Thee,*
>
> *The vision of Thy face strikes me with deepest shame.*

A devotee said to Narendra, \"Will you sing that one - \'O Mother, Thou
my Inner Guide, ever awake within my heart\'?\"

MASTER: \"Oh, no! Why that song now? The proper thing now is to sing of
divine bliss-a song like \'O Mother Syama, full of the waves of
drunkenness divine\'.\"

Narendra sang:

> *O Mother Syama, full of the waves of drunkenness divine!*
>
> *Who knows how Thou dost sport in the world?*
>
> *Thy fun and frolic and Thy glances put to shame the god of love.*
>
> *O Wielder of the sword! O Thou of terrifying face!*
>
> *The earth itself is shaken under Thy leaps and strides!*
>
> *O Thou Abode of the three Gunās! O Redeemer! Fearsome One!*
>
> *Thou who art the Consort of Śiva!*
>
> *Many the forms Thou dost assume, fulfilling Thy bhaktas\' prayers.*
>
> *Thou dancest in the Lotus of the Heart,*
>
> *O Mother, Eternal Consort of Brahman!*

Full of divine ecstasy, Narendra sang again and again the lines:

> *Thou dancest in the Lotus of the Heart,*
>
> *O Mother, Eternal Consort of Brahman!*

Sri Ramakrishna was dancing, drunk with divine love, and he sang again
and again, \"O Mother, Eternal Consort of Brahman!\"

After dancing a long time Sri Ramakrishna resumed his seat. He was very
much pleased to see Narendra in a spiritual mood, singing with tears in
his eyes.

It was about nine o\'clock in the evening. The devotees still sat around
the Master. Vaishnavcharan sang about

Gaurānga:

> *The beautiful Gaurānga, the youthful dancer, fair as molten gold. . .
> .*

Next he sang about Sri Krishna. Krishna had left His pastoral life in
Vrindāvan and become the king of

Mathura. A gopi met Him there and said:

> *O Hari, how shall we know You now?*
>
> *In Mathura\'s royal splendour you have forgotten us.*
>
> *Now, in your kingly robes, you ride an elephant;*
>
> *Have you utterly forgotten how in Vrindāvan You tended cows?*
>
> *O Hari, have you forgotten how you would steal the butter*
>
> *From Braja\'s innocent gopi maids?*

About eleven o\'clock the devotees saluted the Master and were departing
one by one.

MASTER: \"You may all go. (Pointing to Narendra and the younger Naren)
It will be enough if these two stay. (To Girish) Will you eat your
supper at home? You may stay a few minutes if you want to. You want a
smoke! But Balarām\'s servant is just like his master. Ask him for a
smoke; he won\'t give it! (All laugh.) But don\'t go away without having
your smoke.\"

Girish had brought with him a respectable friend. The latter observed
all these things and left the place. Sri Ramakrishna said to Girish: \"I
say this to you and to everyone: Please do not force anybody to come
here. Nothing happens except at the right time.\"

Before leaving, a devotee saluted the Master. He had a young boy with
him. Sri Ramakrishna said to him affectionately, \"It is getting late,
and you have this boy with you.\" Narendra, the younger Naren, and a few
other devotees stayed awhile and then took their leave.

**Wednesday, July 15, 1885**

It was four, o\'clock in the morning. Sri Ramakrishna was in bed in the
small room next to the drawing-room. M. was sitting on a bench on the
outer verandah to the south of the room. A few minutes later Sri
Ramakrishna came out to the verandah. M. saluted him.

MASTER: \"I have already been up once. Well, shall we go to Dakshineswar
this morning?\"

M: \"The Ganges is less choppy in the morning.\"

Day was gradually breaking. The devotees had not yet arrived. Sri
Ramakrishna had washed his mouth and was chanting the names of God in
his sweet voice. He stood near the north door of the room. M. was by his
side. A few minutes later Gopal Ma arrived and stood near him. One or
two woman devotees were looking at the Master from behind the doors of
the inner apartments. They were like the gopis of Vrindāvan looking at
Sri Krishna, or the woman devotees of Nadia looking at Gaurānga from
behind the screen.

After chanting the name of Rāma, Sri Ramakrishna chanted the name of
Krishna: \"Krishna! Krishna! Krishna of the gopis! Gopi! Gopi! Krishna,
the Life of the cowherd boys of Vrindāvan! Krishna, the son of Nanda!
Govinda! Govinda!\"

Next he chanted the name of Gaurānga. Then he repeated, \"Ālekh
Niranjana\", which is a name of God. Saying, \"Niranjana\", he wept. The
devotees wept too. With tears in his eyes the Master said: \"O Niranjan!
O my child! Come! Eat this! Take this! When shall I make my life blessed
by feeding you? You have assumed this human form for my sake.\"

He prayed to Jagannath in a very touching voice:

\"O Jagannath, Lord of the Universe! O Friend of the world! O Friend of
the poor! I am not, O Lord, outside Thy universe. Be gracious to me!\"

While he sang in praise of Jagannath he was beside himself with divine
love.

Now he chanted the name of Narayana . He danced and sang:

*\"O Narayana ! O Narayana ! Narayana ! Narayana !\"*

He danced and sang again:

> *Ah, friend! I have not found Him yet, whose love has driven me mad. .
> . .*

Afterwards the Master sat in the small room with the devotees. He was
completely stripped of his clothes, like a five-year-old child. M.,
Balarām, and a few other devotees were in the room.

MASTER: \"One can see God\'s form. One sees God when all *Upādhis*
disappear and reasoning stops. Then a man becomes speechless and goes
into samādhi. Coming to the theatre, people indulge in all kinds of
gossip. But the moment the curtain goes up, all conversation stops; the
spectators become fully absorbed in what they see on the stage.

**Master\'s love for young disciples**

\"I want to tell you something very secret. Why do I love boys like
Purna and Narendra so much? Once, in a spiritual mood, I felt intense
love for Jagannath, love such as a woman feels for her sweetheart. In
that mood I was about to embrace Him; when I broke my arm. It was then
revealed to me: \'You have assumed this human body. Therefore establish
with human beings the relationship of friend, father, mother, or son.\'

\"I now feel for Purna and the other young boys as I once felt for
Rāmlāla. I used to bathe Rāmlāla, feed Him, put Him to bed, and take Him
wherever I went. I used to weep for Rāmlāla. Now I have the same feeling
for these young boys. Look at Niranjan. He is not attached to anything.
He spends money from his own pocket to take poor patients to the
hospital. At the proposal of marriage he says, \'Goodness! That is the
whirlpool of the Visalaks! I see him seated on a light. \"Purna belongs
to the realm of the Personal God. He was born with an element of Vishnu.
Ah, what yearning he has!

(To M.) \"Didn\'t you notice that he looked at you as if you were his
spiritual brother, his very own? He said he would visit me again, at
Captain\'s house.

**Master\'s praise of Narendra**

\"Narendra belongs to a very high plane-the realm of the Absolute. He
has a manly nature. So many devotees come here, but there is not one
like him.

\"Every now and then I take stock of the devotees. I find that some are
like lotuses with ten petals, some like lotuses with sixteen petals,
some like lotuses with a hundred petals. But among lotuses Narendra is a
thousand-petalled one.

\"Other devotees may be like pots or pitchers; but Narendra is a huge
water-barrel.

\"Others may be like pools or tanks; but Narendra is a huge reservoir
like the Haldārpukur.

\"Among fish, Narendra is a huge red-eyed carp; others are like minnows
or smelts or sardines. Tārak of Belgharia may be called a bass.

\"Narendra is a \'very big receptacle\', one that can hold many things.
He is like a bamboo with a big hollow space inside.

\"Narendra is not under the control of anything. He is not under the
control of attachment or sense pleasures. He is like a male pigeon. If
you hold a male pigeon by its beak, it breaks away from you; but the
female pigeon keeps still. Narendra has the nature of a man; so he sits
on the right side in a carriage. Bhavanāth has a woman\'s nature; so I
make him sit on the other side. I feel great strength when Narendra is
with me in a gathering.\"

About eight o\'clock in the morning Mahendra Mukherji arrived and
saluted the Master. Haripada, Tulsiram and other devotees arrived one by
one and saluted him. Baburam was laid up with fever and could not come.

MASTER (to M. and the others): \"Hasn\'t the younger Naren come? Perhaps
he thought I had left. (To Mukherji) How amazing! Even during his
boyhood, on returning from school, he cried for God. Is it a small thing
to cry for God? He is very intelligent, too. He is like a bamboo with a
big hollow space inside. All of his mind is fixed on me.

Girish Ghosh said to me: The younger Naren went to Navagopal\'s house
when a kirtan was going on. On entering the house he inquired about you
and exclaimed, \"Where is he?\" He was totally unconscious of his
surroundings and practically walked over the people.\' He has no fear of
his relatives\' threats. Sometimes he spends three nights at a stretch
at Dakshineswar.\"

MUKHERJI: \"Hari became simply speechless at what you said yesterday. He
said to me: \'Such wisdom can be found only in the philosophical systems
of Samkhya, Yoga, and Vedānta. He is no ordinary person.\'\"

MASTER: \"But I have never studied Samkhya or Vedānta.

**Knowledge of God is the same as love of Him & Divine love leads to
union with God.**

Perfect Jnāna and perfect bhakti are one and the same thing. A man
reasons, saying, \'Not this, not this\'; he rejects the unreal. When his
reasoning comes to an end, he attains the Knowledge of Brahman. Then he
accepts what he rejected before. A man carefully climbs to the roof,
rejecting the steps one by one. After reaching the roof he realizes that
the steps are made of the same materials as the roof, namely, brick,
lime, and brick-dust.

\"He who is aware of the high is also aware of the low. After the
attainment of knowledge one looks alike on high and low.

\"While Prahlada dwelt on the plane of the Supreme Reality, he
maintained the attitude of \'I am He\'; but when he climbed down to the
physical plane, he would look on himself as the servant of God.

\"Hanuman also sometimes said, \'I am He\', sometimes, \'I am the
servant of God\', sometimes, \'I am a part of God.\'

\"Why should a man cherish love of God in his heart? How else will he
live? How else will he spend his days?

\"To be sure, the ego does not disappear altogether. As long as the pot
of \'I\' persists, one cannot realize \'I am He.\' In samādhi the ego
totally disappears; then what is remains. Ramprasad says: \'O Mother,
when I shall attain Knowledge, then You alone will know whether I am
good or You are good.\'

\"As long as \'I-consciousness\' exists, one should have the attitude of
a bhakta; one should not say, \'I am God.\' A man aware of his body
should feel that he is not Krishna Himself, but His devotee. But if God
draws the devotee to Himself, then it is different. It is like the
master saying to his beloved servant: \'Come, take your seat near me.
You are the same as I.\'

\"The waves are part of the Ganges, but the Ganges is not part of the
waves.

\"Śiva experiences two states of mind. When He is completely absorbed in
His own Self, He feels, \'I am He.\' In that union neither body nor mind
functions. But when He is conscious of His separate ego, He dances,
exclaiming, \'Rāma! Rāma!\'

\"That which is unmoving also moves. Just now you are still, but a few
moments later the same you will be engaged in action.

\"Jnāna and bhakti are one and the same thing. The difference is like
this: one man says \'water\', and another, \'a block of ice\'.

**Two kinds of samādhi**

\"Generally speaking there are two kinds of samādhi. First, sthita or
jada samādhi: one attains it by following the path of knowledge-as a
result of the destruction of the ego through reasoning. Second, bhava
samādhi: one attains this by following the path of bhakti. In this
second samādhi a trace of ego remains, like a line, in order to enable
the devotee to enjoy God, to taste His Lila. But one cannot understand
all this if one is attached to \'woman and gold\'.

\"I said to Kedār, \'You will never succeed if your mind dwells on
\"woman and gold\".\' I wanted to pass my hand over his chest, but I
could not. He has knots and twists inside. It was like a room smelling
of filth, which I could not enter. His attachment to the world is very
deep; it is like a natural emblem of Śiva, whose root spreads as far as
Benares. One will never succeed if one is attached to the world-to
\'woman and gold\'.

**Master praises his young disciples**

\"The youngsters are yet untouched by \'woman and gold\'. That is why I
love them so dearly. Hazra says to me, \'You love a boy if he comes from
a wealthy family or if he is handsome.\' If that is so, then why do I
love Harish, Lātu, and Narendra? Narendra hasn\'t a penny to buy salt to
season his rice.

\"The youngsters\' minds are not yet coloured by worldliness. That is
why they are so pure in heart. Besides, many of them are eternally
perfect; they have been drawn to God from their very birth. It is like a
garden in which, while cleaning it, you suddenly discover water-pipes.
The water gushes forth without any effort on your part.\"

BALARĀM: \"Sir, how was it possible for Purna to know all of a sudden
that the world is illusory?\"

MASTER: \"He has inherited that knowledge from his previous births. In
his past lives he practised many disciplines. It is the body alone that
is small or grows big, and not the Ātman.

\"Do you know what these youngsters are like? They are like certain
plants that grow fruit first and then flowers. These devotees first of
all have the vision of God; next they hear about His glories and
attributes; and at last they are united with Him. Look at Niranjan. He
always keeps his accounts clear. He will be able to go whenever he hears
the call.

**Respect for one\'s own mother**

But one should look after one\'s mother as long as she is alive. I used
to worship my mother with flowers and sandal-paste. It is the Mother of
the Universe who is embodied as our earthly mother.

\"As long as you look after your own body, you must look after your
mother too. Therefore I said to Hazra: \'when you have a cold, you
procure black pepper, sugar candy, and salt. As long as you feel you
must look after your body, you must look after your mother too.\'

\"But it is quite different when you completely forget your body. Then
God Himself assumes your responsibilities. A minor cannot look after
himself; therefore a guardian is appointed for him. Chaitanyadeva, like
a minor, could not look after himself.\"

M. went to the Ganges to bathe.

**Master\'s spiritual experiences**

Sri Ramakrishna was talking with the devotees in the small room in
Balarām\'s house. Mahendra, Balarām, Tulasi, Haripada, Girish, and other
devotees were sitting on the floor. M. returned from the Ganges. After
saluting the Master he took a seat near him. Sri Ramakrishna was
recounting to the devotees some of his spiritual experiences.

MASTER: \"One day in the Kāli temple Haladhāri and Nangta were reading
the Adhyātma Rāmāyana. Suddenly I had a vision of a river with woods on
both sides. The trees and plants were green. Rāma and Lakshmana were
walking along wearing their shorts. One day, in front of the kuthi, I
saw Arjuna\'s chariot. Sri Krishna was

seated in it as the charioteer. I still remember it. Another day, while
listening to kirtan at Kamarpukur, I saw Gaurānga in front of me.

\"At that time a naked person, emerging from my body, used to go about
with me. I used to joke with him. He looked like a boy and was a
paramahamsa. I can\'t describe to you all the divine forms I saw at that
time. I was suffering then from indigestion, which would become worse
when I saw visions; so I would try to shun these divine forms and would
spit on the ground when I saw them. But they would follow me and obsess
me like ghosts. I was always overwhelmed with divine ecstasy and
couldn\'t tell the passing of day and night. On the day after such a
vision I would have a severe attack of diarrhoea, and all these
ecstasies would pass out through my bowels.\"

GIRISH (smiling): \"I am examining your horoscope.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"I was born on the second day of the bright fortnight
of the moon. My horoscope shows the positions of the sun, the moon, and
Mercury at the time of my birth. There are not many more details.\"

GIRISH: \"You were born under Kumbha. Rāma and Krishna were born under
Karkat and Brisha, and Chaitanya under Simha.\"

MASTER: \"I had two desires: first, that I should be the king of the
devotees, and second, that I should not be a dry sādhu.\"

GIRISH (smiling): \"Why did you have to practise spiritual discipline?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Even the Divine Mother had to practise austere
*sādhanā* to obtain Śiva as Her husband. She practised the panchatapa.
She would also immerse Her body in water in wintertime, and look fixedly
at the sun. Krishna Himself had to practise much *sādhanā*. I had many
mystic experiences, but I cannot reveal their contents. Under the
bel-tree I had many flaming visions. There I practised the various
sadhanas prescribed in the Tantra. I needed many articles-human skulls,
and so forth and so on. The Brahmani used to collect these things for
me. I practised a number of mystic postures.

\"I had another strange experience: if I felt egotistic on a particular
day, I would be sick the following day.\"

M. sat motionless as a picture on canvas, hearing about these unique
visions of the Master. The other devotees also were spellbound. There
was a dead silence in the room.

TULASI (pointing to M.): \"He never laughs.\"

MASTER: \"But he laughs inside. The surface of the river Phalgu is
covered with sand; but if you dig into the sand, water comes up.

(To M.) \"Don\'t you scrape your tongue? Scrape it every day.\"

BALARĀM: \"Well, Purna has heard much about you from M.\"

MASTER: \"Perhaps the account of my early spiritual experiences.\"

BALARĀM: \"If Purna is perfect by nature, then what is M.\'s function?\"

MASTER: \"A mere instrument.\"

It was nine o\'clock. Sri Ramakrishna was about to leave for
Dakshineswar. Arrangements were being made for his departure. A boat had
been hired at Baghbazar. The devotees saluted the Master.

Sri Ramakrishna went to the boat with one or two devotees. Gopal Ma
accompanied them. She intended to spend the morning at Dakshineswar and
go to Kamarhati in the afternoon. The camp cot generally used by

Rākhāl at Dakshineswar had been sent to Calcutta for repair. It was put
in the boat, and the boat left for Dakshineswar.

According to the Hindu almanac the day was not auspicious. So Sri
Ramakrishna decided to return to Balarām\'s house the next Saturday and
start again for Dakshineswar on an auspicious day.

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 43**

VISIT TO NANDA BOSE′S HOUSE

> Tuesday, July 28, 1885

IT WAS ABOUT THREE O\'CLOCK in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna was
sitting in Balarām\'s drawing-room with

the devotees. Among others, Binode, Rākhāl, the younger Naren, and M.
were present. The Master had come

to Balarām\'s house in the morning and had taken his midday meal there.
At Balarām\'s house the Deity was

worshipped as Jagannāth, and the members of the family partook of the
food offered to the Deity; Sri

Ramakrishna used to say that the food at Balarām\'s house was very pure.

**Pictures at Nanda\'s house**

Narayan and certain other devotees had remarked to the Master that Nanda
Bose, an aristocrat of Baghbazar, had many pictures of gods and
goddesses in his house. Hence Sri Ramakrishna intended to pay a visit to
Nanda\'s house in the afternoon. A Brahmin woman devoted to the Master
lived near by. She often came to see him at Dakshineswar. She was
extremely sorrowful over the death of her only daughter, and the Master
had agreed to go to her house. She had invited him with great
earnestness. From her house the Master was to go to the house of Ganu\'s
mother, another devotee.

The younger Naren had said to Sri Ramakrishna that he would not be able
to visit him often on account of his having to prepare for his
examinations.

MASTER (to the younger Naren): \"I didn\'t send for you today.\"

THE YOUNGER NAREN (smiling): \"What can be done about it now?\"

MASTER: \"Well, my child, I don\'t want to interfere with your studies.
You may visit me when you have leisure.\" The Master said these words as
if he were piqued.

He was ready to go to Nanda Bose\' house. A palanquin was brought for
him, and he got into it repeating the name of God. He had put on a pair
of black varnished slippers and a red-bordered cloth. As Sri Ramakrishna
sat down in the palanquin, M. put the slippers by his side. He
accompanied the palanquin on foot. Paresh joined them.

They entered the gate of Nanda\'s house, crossed the spacious square and
stopped in front of the building. The members of the family greeted the
Master. He asked M. to hand him the slippers and then got out of the
palanquin and entered the large hall. It was a very spacious room.
Pictures of gods and goddesses were hanging on all sides.

Nanda Bose and his brother Pasupati saluted Sri Ramakrishna. The
devotees of the Master also arrived. Girish\'s brother Atul came, and
Prasanna\'s father, who was a frequent visitor at Nanda\'s house, was
there. Prasanna was a devotee of the Master.

The Master looked at the pictures. M. and a few other devotees stood
around him. Pasupati was explaining the pictures to them.

The first picture was of Vishnu with four arms. At the very sight of it
Sri Ramakrishna was overwhelmed with ecstasy; he sat down on the floor
and remained a few minutes in that spiritual mood.

In the second picture Rāma was blessing Hanuman, with His hand on the
devotee\'s head. Hanuman\'s gaze was fixed on Rāma\'s Lotus Feet. The
Master looked at the picture a long time and exclaimed with great
fervour, \"Ah me! Ah me!\"

The third picture was of Krishna standing with flute to His lips under
the Kadamba tree.

The fourth was of Vāmana, the Dwarf, who was an Incarnation of Vishnu.
The Master looked intently at this picture.

Next the Master looked at a picture of Nrisimha, and then at one of
Krishna with a herd of cows. Krishna was tending the cows with His
cowherd friends on the bank of the Jamuna at Vrindāvan. M. said, \"A
lovely picture!\"

Sri Ramakrishna then saw pictures of Dhumavati, Shorasi, Bhuvanesvari,
Tara, and Kāli. He said: \"All these portray the terrible aspects of the
Divine Mother. If one keeps these pictures, one should worship them. But
you must be lucky, to be able to hang them like that on the wall.\"

At the sight of Annapurna\'s picture, Sri Ramakrishna exclaimed with
great fervour, \"Grand! Grand!\"

The next picture was one of Rādhika as monarch. She was seated on a
throne in the Nikunja grove, surrounded by her woman attendants. Sri
Krishna guarded the entrance of the grove as her officer.

Next was Sri Krishna\'s picture. Then came a picture of Sarasvati, the
goddess of learning and music. It was in a glass case. She was in an
ecstatic mood, playing melodies on the Vina.

**Master praises his host**

After seeing the pictures, Sri Ramakrishna went to the master of the
house and said: \"I am very happy today. It is grand! You are a real
Hindu. You have these pictures instead of English ones. I am
surprised!\"

Nanda Bose was seated. He said to the Master: \"Please take a seat. Why
are you standing?\"

Sri Ramakrishna sat down. He said: \"These are very large pictures. You
are a real Hindu.\"

NANDA: \"I have European pictures also.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"They are not like these. I am sure you don\'t pay
much attention to them.\"

A picture of Kasha\'s Nava-Vishnu hung on the wall. Suresh Mitra, a
beloved householder disciple of the Master, had had it painted. In this
picture Sri Ramakrishna was pointing out to Keshab that people of
different religions proceed to the same goal by different paths.

MASTER: \"That was painted for Surendra.\"

PRASANNA\'S FATHER (smiling): \"You too are in that picture.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, it contains everything. This is the ideal of
modern times.\"

As he spoke Sri Ramakrishna manifested great spiritual fervour. He was
in an ecstatic mood, talking to the Divine Mother. A few minutes later
he said, like a drunkard, \"I am not unconscious.\" Looking at the
house, he said: \"It is a huge mansion. But what does it consist of?
Bricks, timber, and clay.\"

A little later he said, \"I am very happy to see these pictures of gods
and goddesses.\" He added: \"It is not good to keep pictures of the
terrible aspects of the Divine Mother. If one does, one should worship
them.\"

PASUPATI (smiling): \"Well, things will go on as long as She keeps them
going.\"

MASTER: \"That is true. But one should think of God. It is not good to
forget Him.\"

NANDA: \"But how little we think of God!\"

MASTER: \"One thinks of God through His grace.\"

NANDA: \"But how can we obtain God\'s grace? Has He really the power to
bestow grace?\"

**Master\'s prayer**

MASTER (smiling): \"I see. You think as the intellectuals do: one reaps
the results of one\'s actions. Give up these ideas. The effect of karma
wears away if one takes refuge in God. I prayed to the Divine Mother
with flowers in my hand: \'Here, Mother, take Thy sin; here, take Thy
virtue. I don\'t want either of these; give me only real bhakti. Here,
Mother, take Thy good; here, take Thy bad. I don\'t want any of Thy good
or bad; give me only real bhakti. Here, Mother, take Thy dharma; here,
take Thy adharma. I don\'t want any of Thy dharma or adharma; give me
only real bhakti. Here, Mother, take Thy knowledge; here, take Thy
ignorance. I don\'t want any of Thy knowledge or ignorance; give me only
real bhakti. Here, Mother, take Thy purity; here, take Thy impurity.
Give me only real bhakti.\' \"

NANDA \"Can God violate law?\"

MASTER: \"What do you mean? He is the Lord of all. He can do everything.
He who has made the law can also change it.

**Nature of worldly enjoyment**

\"But you may very well talk that way. Perhaps you want to enjoy the
world, and that is why you talk that way. There is a view that a man\'s
inner spirit is not awakened unless he is through with enjoyment. But
what is there to enjoy? The pleasures of \'woman and gold\'? This moment
they exist and the next moment they disappear. It is all momentary. And
what is there in \'woman and gold\'? It is like the hog plum-all stone
and skin. If one eats it, one suffers from colic. Or like a sweetmeat.
Once you swallow it, it is gone.\"

**Is God partial?**

Nanda remained silent a few minutes. Then he said: \"Oh, yes. People no
doubt talk that way. But is God partial? If things happen through God\'s
grace, then I must say God is partial.\"

MASTER: \"But God Himself has become everything-the universe and its
living beings. You will realize it when you have Perfect Knowledge. God
Himself has become the twenty-four cosmic principles: the mind,
intellect, body, and so forth. Is there anyone but Himself to whom He
can show partiality?\"

NANDA : \"Why has He assumed all these different forms? Why are some
wise and some ignorant?\"

MASTER: \"It is His sweet will.\"

ATUL: \"Kedār Bābu puts it nicely. Once a man asked him, \'Why has God
created the world?\' He replied, \'I was not present at the conference
where God made the plans of His creation.\'\"

MASTER: \"Oh! It is His sweet will\"

So saying, the Master sang:

> *O Mother, all is done after Thine own sweet will:*
>
> *Thou art in truth self-willed, Redeemer of mankind!*
>
> *Thou workest Thine own work; men only call it theirs.*
>
> *Thou it is that holdest the elephant in the mire;*
>
> *Thou, that helpest the lame man scale the loftiest hill.*
>
> *On some Thou dost bestow the bliss of Brahmanhood;*
>
> *Yet others Thou dost hurl into this world below.*
>
> *Thou art the Moving Force, and I the mere machine;*
>
> *The house am I, and Thou the Spirit dwelling there;*
>
> *I am the chariot, and Thou the Charioteer:*
>
> *I move alone as Thou, O Mother, movest me.*

**Liberation for all**

He continued: \"The Divine Mother is full of bliss. Creation,
preservation, and destruction are the waves of Her sportive pleasure.
Innumerable are the living beings. Only one or two among them obtain
liberation. And that makes Her happy.

> *Out of a hundred thousand kites, at best but one or two break free;*
>
> *And Thou dost laugh and clap Thy hands, O Mother, watching them!*
>
> *Some are being entangled in the world and some are being liberated
> from it.*
>
> *How many are the boats, O mind,*
>
> *That float on the ocean of this world!*
>
> *How many are those that sink!\"*

NANDA: \"It may be Her sweet will; but it is death to us.\"

MASTER: \"But who are you? It is the Divine Mother who has become all
this. It is only as long as you do not know Her that you say, \'I\',
\'I\'.

\"All will surely realize God. All will be liberated. It may be that
some get their meal in the morning, some at noon, and some in the
evening: but none will go without food. All, without any exception, will
certainly know their real Self.\"

PASUPATI: \"True, sir. It seems that it is God alone who has become
everything.\"

**Nature of \"I\"**

MASTER: \"Try to find out what this \'I\' is. Is this \'I\' the bones or
flesh or blood or intestines? Seeking the \'I\', you discover \'Thou\'.
In other words, nothing exists inside you but the power of God. There is
no \'I\', but only \'He\'. (To Pasupati) You have so much wealth, but
you have no egotism. It is not possible to rid oneself altogether of the
ego; so, as long as it is there, let the rascal remain as the servant of
God. (All laugh.) The ego that makes a man feel he is a devotee of God
or a son of God or a servant of God is good. But the ego that makes a
man attached to \'woman and gold\' is the \'unripe ego\'. That ego is to
be renounced.\"

The head of the household and the others were very much pleased to hear
this interpretation of the ego.

MASTER (to Pasupati): \"There are two signs of knowledge: first, absence
of pride, and second, a peaceful nature. You have both. Therefore you
must have received the grace of God.

\"Too much wealth makes one forget God. That is the very nature of
wealth. Jadu Mallick has become very rich.

Nowadays he doesn\'t talk of God. Formerly he used to enjoy spiritual
talk a great deal.

\"\'Woman and gold\' is a kind of wine. If a man drinks too much wine,
he does not show his father and uncle the respect that is due to them.
Very often he abuses them. A drunkard cannot distinguish between his
superior and his inferior.\"

NANDA: \"That is true, sir.\"

PASUPATI: \"Sir, what do you think of Theosophy and Spiritualism? Are
these true? What do you think of the solar plane, the lunar plane, the
stellar plane?\"

MASTER: \"My dear sir, I don\'t know about these things. Why bother
about them so much? You have come to the orchard to eat mangoes. Enjoy
them. What is the use of your calculating how many mango-trees there
are, how many millions of branches, how many billions of leaves? I have
come to the orchard to eat mangoes. Let me enjoy them.

\"Once a man\'s inner spirit is awakened, once he succeeds in knowing
God, he doesn\'t feel the desire even to know about all this rubbish.
How incoherently a delirious patient talks: \'I shall eat five seers of
rice! I shall

drink a whole tank of water!\' \'Will you?\' says the physician. \'All
right! You will have them.\' Saying this, the physician goes on with his
smoke. But he pays attention to what the patient says when the patient
is no longer delirious.\"

PASUPATI: \"Will our delirium last for ever?\"

MASTER: \"Why should you think so? Fix your mind on God, and spiritual
consciousness will be awakened in you.\"

PASUPATI (smiling): \"Our union with God is only momentary. It doesn\'t
last any longer than a pipeful of tobacco.\" (All Laugh.)

MASTER: \"What if that is so? Union with God even for one moment surely
gives a man liberation.

\"Ahalyā said to Rāma, \'O Rāma, it doesn\'t matter if I am born as a
pig or any other being; only bless me that my mind may dwell on Thy
Lotus Feet and be filled with real devotion to Thee.\'

\"Nārada said to Rāma: \'O Rāma, I want from Thee no other favour.
Please give me real love for Thee; and please bless me, that I may not
come under the spell of Thy world-bewitching māyā.\'

\"When a man sincerely prays to God, he is able to fix his mind on God
and develop real love for His Lotus Feet.

\"Give up all such notions as: \'Shall we be cured of our delirium?\',
\'What will happen to us?\', \'We are sinners!\'

(To Nanda) One must have this kind of faith: \'What? Once I have uttered
the name of Rāma, can I be a sinner any more?\'\"

NANDA: \"Is there no after-life? What about punishment for our sins?\"

MASTER: \"Why not enjoy your mangoes? What need have you to calculate
about the after-life and what happens then, and things like that? Eat
your mangoes. You need mangoes. You need devotion to God. \"

**God, the Wish-fulfilling Tree**

NANDA: \"But where is the mango-tree? Where do I get mangoes?\"

MASTER: \"Tree? God is the eternal and infinite Brahman. He does exist;
there is no doubt about it. He is eternal. But you must remember this,
that He is the Kalpataru.

> *Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to Kāli, the Wish-fulfilling
> Tree, And there beneath It gather the four fruits of life.*

\"You must go to the Kalpataru and pray. Only then will you obtain the
fruits. Only then will the fruits fall from the tree. Only then will you
be able to gather them. There are four fruits: dharma, artha, kama, and
moksha. The jnanis seek the fruit of liberation; and the bhaktas, love
of God, love without any motive behind it. They seek neither dharma nor
artha nor kama.

**About the after-life**

\"You ask about the after-life. According to the Gitā you will become in
the next life what you think of in the hour of death. King Bharata was
very much grieved over his pet deer; he died repeating the word
\'deer\'; therefore he was reborn as a deer. That is why day and night a
man should practise worship, japa, meditation, and other spiritual
exercises. Only then, by virtue of practice, will he be able to think of
God in the hour of death. If one dies thus, thinking of God, one will
acquire God\'s nature.

\"Keshab Sen, too, asked me about the after-life. I said to him also,
\'What need have you of all these

calculations?\' Then I said: \'As long as a man does not realize God, he
will return to the world. The potter puts his clay jars and lids out in
the sun to bake. If cattle trample them underfoot, he throws, away the
baked ones. But he collects the soft ones, mixes them, with more clay,
puts them on the wheel, and makes new vessels from them.\' \"

The master of the house had not yet shown any sign of serving Sri
Ramakrishna with refreshments. Sri Ramakrishna himself said to Nanda:
\"You see, you should offer me something to eat. That is why the other
day I said to Jadu\'s mother: \'Look here. Give me something to eat.\'
Otherwise it brings harm to the householder.\"

Nanda Bose ordered some sweets. Sri Ramakrishna began to eat them. Nanda
and the others were watching the Master and his actions. After eating
the sweets, Sri Ramakrishna wanted to wash his hands. The plate on which
the sweets were served had been placed on the sheet covering the carpet;
so the Master could not wash his hands in the plate. A servant brought a
brass bowl for him to use. But Sri Ramakrishna would not use it, since
only rajasic people used such things. He asked the servant to take it
away. The master of the house said to him, \"Please wash your hands.\"
Absent-mindedly Sri Ramakrishna said: \"What? Shall I wash my hands?\"

The Master walked to the south verandah. He asked M. to pour water into
his hands. M. poured water from a jug. The Master dried his hands with
his cloth and returned to the room; Then he was offered betel-leaf on a
tray. But the other guests had already taken some from the same tray;
the Master did not accept any.

NANDA (to the Master): \"May I say something?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"What?\"

NANDA: \"Why didn\'t you eat any betel-leaf? Everything else you did was
proper; this alone seems to be otherwise.\"

MASTER: \"Before I eat anything I offer it to God. It is a notion of
mine.\"

NANDA :\"But the betel-leaf would have gone to God all the same.\"

MASTER: \"There is the path of Jnāna , and there is also the path of
bhakti. According to the Jnāni everything can be eaten by applying the
Knowledge of Brahman; but the follower of bhakti keeps a little
distinction.\"

NANDA: \"But I still maintain that you did not act rightly.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"It is just a notion of mine. What you say is also
right. That too is supported by the scriptures.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was warning Nanda of flatterers.

MASTER: \"Beware of flatterers. They are after their own selfish
purpose.(To Prasanna\'s father) Do you live in this house?\"

PRASANNA\'S FATHER: \"No, sir, I am a neighbour. Won\'t you have a
smoke?\"

MASTER (very humbly): \"No, please enjoy yourself. I don\'t feel like
smoking now.\"

Nanda\'s house was like a palace. Sri Ramakrishna said to him: \"Jadu
hasn\'t such a big house. I told him so the other day.\"

NANDA :\"He has built a new house at Jorashanko.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was encouraging Nanda.

MASTER (to Nanda): \"Though you are a householder, still you have kept
your mind on God. Is that a small thing? The man who has renounced the
world will pray to Him as a matter of course. Is there any credit in
that? But blessed indeed is he who, while leading a householder\'s life,
prays to God. He is like a man who finds an object after removing a
stone weighing twenty maunds.

**Nārada and Hanuman**

\"One should pray to God, establishing with Him an appropriate
relationship. Hanuman\'s love for God was mixed with knowledge; but
Nārada\'s love for God was pure and unadulterated.

\"Rāma asked Hanuman, \'Hanuman, what attitude do you cherish toward Me
when you worship Me?\' Hanuman answered: \'Sometimes I see that You are
the whole and I am a part; sometimes I see that You are the Master and I
am Your servant. But Rāma, when I have the Knowledge of Reality, then I
find that You are I and I am You.\'

\"Rāma said to Nārada, \'Ask a favour of Me.\' Nārada said, \'O Rāma,
grant me the boon that I may have genuine love for Thy Lotus Feet and
that I may not come under the spell of Thy world-bewitching māyā!\'\"

Sri Ramakrishna was about to take his leave.

MASTER (to Nanda): \"According to the Gitā a man who is honoured and
respected by many people possesses a special power of God. You have
divine power.\"

NANDA: \"All men have the same power.\"

**Different degrees of divine manifestation**

MASTER (sharply): \"You all say the same thing. Can all men ever possess
power to the same degree? God no doubt dwells in all beings as the
all-pervading Spirit, but the manifestations of His Power are different
in different beings.

\"Vidyāsāgar, too, said the same thing. He said, \'Has God given some
more power and some less?\' Thereupon I said to him: \'If there are not
different manifestations of His Power, then why have we come to see you?
Have you grown two horns on your head?\'\"

Sri Ramakrishna rose. The devotees followed him. Pasupati accompanied
them to the door.

**Visit to the Brahmani\'s house**

The Master arrived at the house of the brahmin lady who was
grief-stricken on account of her daughter\'s death. It was an old brick
house. Entering the house, the Master passed the cowshed on his left. He
and the devotees went to the roof, where they took seats. People were
standing there in rows. Others were seated. They were all eager to get a
glimpse of Sri Ramakrishna.

The brahmani had a sister; both of them were widows. Their brothers also
lived in the house with their families. The brahmani had been busy all
day making arrangements to receive Sri Ramakrishna. While the Master was
at Nanda Bose\'s house she had been extremely restless, going out of the
house every few minutes to see if he was coming. He had promised to come
to her place from Nanda\'s. Because of his delay she had thought perhaps
he would not come at all.

Sri Ramakrishna was seated on a carpet. M., Narayan, Jogin, Devendra,
and others were seated on a mat. A few minutes later the Younger Naren
and some other devotees arrived. The brahmani\'s sister came to the
Master and saluted him. She said, \"Sister has just gone to Nanda
Bose\'s house to inquire the reason for your delay in coming here. She
will return presently.\"

A sound was heard downstairs and she exclaimed, \"There she comes!\" She
went down. But it was not the brahmani.

Sri Ramakrishna sat there smiling, surrounded by devotees.

M. (to Devendra): \"What a grand sight! All these people-young and old,
men and women-standing in lines, eager to have a glimpse of him and hear
his words.\"

DEVENDRA (to the Master): \"M. says that this place is better than
Nanda\'s. The devotion of these people is amazing.\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughed.

The brahmani\'s sister exclaimed, \"Here comes sister!\"

**Brahmani\'s indescribable joy**

The brahmani came and saluted the Master. She was beside herself with
joy. She did not know what to say. In a half-choked voice she said:
\"This joy is too much for me. Perhaps I shall die of it. Tell me,
friends, how shall I be able to live? I did not feel such a thrill even
when Chandi, my daughter, used to visit the house accompanied by
liveried footmen, with armed guards lining both sides of the street. Oh!
Now I have no trace of my grief at her death. I was afraid he would not
come. Then I thought that, if that happened, I should throw into the
Ganges all the things I had arranged for his reception and
entertainment. I should not speak to him any more. If he visited a
place, I should go there, look at him from a distance, and then come
away.

\"Let me go and tell everybody how happy I am. Let me go and tell Yogin
of my good luck.\"

Still overwhelmed with joy she said: \"A labourer won a hundred thousand
rupees in a lottery. The moment he heard the news he died of joy. Yes,
he really and truly died. I am afraid the same thing is going to happen
to me. Please bless me, friends, or else I shall certainly die.\"

M. was amazed to see the brahmani\'s sincere joy and her ecstatic mood.
He was about to take the dust of her feet.

\"What are you doing?\" she exclaimed and saluted M.

The brahmani was extremely happy at the sight of the devotees. She said:
\"I am so happy to see you all here. I have brought the younger Naren;
without him, who would there be to make us laugh?\"

She was talking like this when her sister came up and said: \"Come down,
sister! How can I manage things if you stay here? Can I do it all by
myself?\"

But the brahmani was overwhelmed with joy. She could not take her eyes
from the Master and the devotees.

After a while she very respectfully took Sri Ramakrishna to another room
and offered him sweets and other refreshments. The devotees were
entertained on the roof.

It was about eight o\'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna was ready to
leave. When he came to the door, the brahmani asked her sister-in-law to
salute the Master. Next, one of her brothers took the dust of the
Master\'s feet. Referring to him, she said: \"He is one of my brothers.
He is a fool\" \"No, no!\" said the Master. \"They are all good.\" A man
showed the way with a light. At places it was dark. Sri Ramakrishna
stood in front of the cow-shed. The devotees gathered around him. M.
saluted the Master, who was about to go to the house of Ganu\'s mother.

**Master\'s visit to Ganu\'s mother**

Sri Ramakrishna was seated in the drawing-room of Ganu\'s mother\'s
house. It was on the Street floor. The room was used by a concert party.
Several young men played on their instruments now and then for the
pleasure of the Master.

It was eight-thirty in the evening. Moonlight flooded the streets, the
houses, and the sky. It was the first day

after the full moon.

The brahmani, who had also come, was visiting the drawing-room and the
inner apartments alternately. Every few minutes she would come to the
door of the drawing-room and look at the Master. Some youngsters from
the neighbourhood also looked at him through the windows. The people of
the locality, young and old, came thronging to see the saint.

The younger Naren saw the boys in the street climbing the windows. He
said to them: \"Why are you here? Get away! Go home!\" The Master said
tenderly, \"Let them stay.\" Every now and then he chanted: \"Hari Om!
Hari Om!\"

The floor of the drawing-room was covered with a carpet. The young
musicians sat on it and sang:

> *O Kesava, bestow Thy grace*
>
> *Upon Thy luckless servants here!*
>
> *O Kesava, who dost delight*
>
> *To roam Vrindāvan\'s glades and groves! . . .*

**Master praises the music.**

MASTER: \"Ah, how sweet the music is! How melodious the violin is! How
good the accompaniments are! (Pointing to a boy) He and the flutist seem
to be a nice pair.\"

The orchestra went on playing. After it was over, Sri Ramakrishna said
joyfully, \"It is very fine indeed.\" Pointing to a young man, he said,
\"He seems to know how to play every instrument.\" He said to M., \"They
are all good people.\"

After the concert the young musician said to the devotees, \"We should
like to hear some of you sing.\" The brahmani stood near the door. She
said: \"None of them knows how to sing. Perhaps Mohin Babu can sing. But
he will not sing before the Master.\"

A YOUNG MAN: \"Why? I can sing even before my father.\"

THE YOUNGER NAREN (laughing): \"But he has not yet advanced that far.\"

All laughed. A few minutes later the brahmani said to Sri Ramakrishna,
\"Please come inside.\"

MASTER: \"Why?\"

BRAHMANI: \"The refreshments are served there. Please come.\"

MASTER: \"Why not bring them here?\"

BRAHMANI: \"Ganu\'s mother requests you to bless the room with the dust
of your feet. Then the room will be turned into Benares, and anyone
dying in it will have no trouble hereafter.\"

Sri Ramakrishna went inside accompanied by the brahmani and the young
men of the family. The devotees were strolling outside in the moonlight.
M. and Binode were pacing the street south of the house and recalling
the various incidents in the life of their beloved Master.

Sri Ramakrishna had returned to Balarām\'s house. He was resting in the
small room to the west of the drawing-room. It was quite late, almost a
quarter to eleven.

Sri Ramakrishna said to Jogin, \"Please rub my feet gently.\" M. was
sitting near by. While Jogin was rubbing his feet the Master said
suddenly: \"I feel hungry. I shall eat some farina pudding.\"

The brahmani had accompanied the Master and the devotees to Balarām\'s
house. Her brother knew how to

play the drums. Sri Ramakrishna said, \"It will serve our purpose to
send for her brother when Narendra or some other singer wants to sing.\"

Sri Ramakrishna ate a little pudding. Jogin and the other devotees left
the room. M. was stroking the Master\'s feet. They talked together.

MASTER (referring to the brahmani and her relatives): \"Ah! How happy
they were!\"

**Martha and Mary**

1.  \"How amazing! A similar thing happened with two women at the time
    of Jesus. They too were sisters, and devoted to Christ. Martha and
    Mary.\"

MASTER (eagerly); \"Tell me the story.\"

1.  \"Jesus Christ, like you, went to their house with His devotees. At
    the sight of Him one of the sisters was filled with ecstatic
    happiness. It reminds me of a song about Gaurānga:

> *My two eyes sank in the sea of Gora\'s heavenly beauty*
>
> *And did not come back to me again;*
>
> *Down went my mind, as well, forgetting how to swim.*

\"The other sister, all by herself, was arranging the food to entertain
Jesus. She complained to the Master, saying: \'Lord, please judge for
Yourself-how wrong my sister is! She is sitting in Your room and I am
doing all these things by myself.\' Jesus said: \'Your sister indeed\'
is blessed. She has developed the only thing needful in human life: love
of God.\"

MASTER: \"Well, after seeing all this, What do you feel?\"

**Master about himself**

1.  \"I feel that Christ, Chaitanyadeva, and yourself-all three are one
    and the same. It is the same Person that has become all these
    three.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, yes! One! One! It is indeed one. Don\'t you see that it
is He alone who dwells here in this way.\"

As he said this, Sri Ramakrishna pointed with his finger to his own
body.

1.  \"You explained clearly, the other day, how God incarnates Himself
    on earth.\" MASTER: \"Tell me what I said.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"You told us to imagine a field extending to the horizon and
    beyond. It extends without any obstruction; but we cannot see it on
    account of a wall in front of us. In that wall there is a round
    hole. Through the hole we see a part of that infinite field.\"

MASTER: \"Tell me what that hole is.\"

M: \"You are that hole. Through you can be seen everything-that Infinite
Meadow without any end.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was very much pleased. Patting M.\'s back, he said: \"I
see you have understood that. That\'s fine!\"

1.  \"It is indeed difficult to understand that. One cannot quite grasp
    how God, Perfect Brahman that He is, can dwell in that small body.\"

The Master quoted from a song:

> *Oh, no one at all has found out who He is;*
>
> *Like a madman from door to door He roams,*
>
> *Like a poor beggar He roams from door to door.*

**Master and Jesus**

1.  \"You also told us about Jesus.\" MASTER: \"What did I say?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"You went into samādhi at the sight of Jesus Christ\'s picture in
    Jadu Mallick\'s garden house. You saw Jesus come down from the
    picture and merge in your body.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was silent a few moments. Then he said to M.: \"Perhaps
there is a meaning in what has happened to my throat \[referring to the
sore in his throat\]. This has happened lest I should make myself light
before all; lest I should go to all sorts of places and sing and
dance.\"

**About Dwija**

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk about Dwija.

MASTER: \"He didn\'t come today. Why?\"

M: \"I asked him to come. He said he would. I don\'t know why he
didn\'t.\"

MASTER: \"He has great yearning. Well, he must be someone belonging to
this. Isn\'t that so?\"

M: \"Yes, sir, it must be so. Otherwise, how could he have such
yearning?\"

Sri Ramakrishna lay down inside the mosquito curtain. M. fanned him. The
Master turned on his side. He told M. how God incarnates Himself in a
human body. He told him, further, about his, M.\'s, spiritual ideal.

MASTER: \"At the beginning I too passed through such states that I did
not see divine forms. Even now I don\'t see them often.\"

1.  \"Among all the forms God chooses for His Lila , I like best His
    play as a human being.\" MASTER: \"That is enough. And you are
    seeing me.\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 44**

THE MASTER ON HIMSELF AND HIS EXPERIENCES

> August 9, 1885

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in his room at Dakshineswar. Rākhāl , M.,
Dwija and his father, and other

devotees were present. It was about four o\'clock in the afternoon.

After returning from Vrindāvan Rākhāl had spent a few days at home. Now
he was staying with the Master.

Lātu, Harish, and Ramlal were also staying at the temple garden.

**Beginning of Master\'s illness**

Sri Ramakrishna was not well. It was the beginning of the illness
subsequently diagnosed as the fatal cancer. But this did not disturb the
serenity of his mind. Day and night he had only one thought, and that
was the spiritual welfare of his disciples. He was guiding them toward
the attainment of God. He encouraged them constantly to cultivate
knowledge and devotion and warned them of the snares of \"woman and
gold\". He was completely indifferent to his own illness and devoted
himself whole-heartedly to the fulfilment of his earthly mission.

Dwija was about sixteen years old. After the death of his mother, his
father had married a second time. Dwija often accompanied M. to
Dakshineswar; but his father did not approve of it.

Dwija\'s father had for a long time been speaking of visiting Sri
Ramakrishna. Today he had come to Dakshineswar. He was the manager of a
business firm in Calcutta and had passed his examination in law.

MASTER (to Dwija\'s father): \"Please don\'t mind your children\'s
coming here.

**Advice to the worldly-minded**

\"I ask people to live in the world after the awakening of their
spiritual consciousness. After extracting gold through hard labour, a
man may keep it under earth or in a box or under water. The gold is not
affected.

\"I ask people to live in the world in a spirit of detachment. If you
break the jack-fruit after rubbing oil on your hands, its sticky juice
will not smear them.

\"If the \'unripe\' mind dwells in the world, the mind gets soiled. One
should first attain knowledge and then live in the world.

\"If you put milk in water the milk is spoiled. But this will not happen
if butter, churned from the milk, is put in water.\"

DWIJA\'S FATHER: \"That is true, sir.\"

**Instructing Dwija\'s father**

MASTER (smiling): \"I know why you scold your children. You only
threaten them. The brahmachari said to the snake; \'you are a fool
indeed! I forbade you to bite but not to hiss. Your enemies would not
have beaten you, if only you had hissed at them.\' Your scolding of the
children is really a hissing. (Dwija\'s father smiles.)

\"A good son is a indication of his father\'s spiritual nature. If good
water comes out when a reservoir is dug, it only indicates the virtue of
the owner.

\"A son is called Atmaja, \'the self reborn\'. There is no difference
between you and your son. In one way you yourself are reborn as your
son. In one sense you are a worldly person, working in a business office
and enjoying worldly life; in another sense you are a devotee of God, in
the form of your son. I heard that you were a very worldly person; but
now I find it isn\'t so. (Smiling) You know all this. I understand that
you are

very circumspect. Perhaps that is why you are nodding your assent to
what I am saying. (Dwija\'s father smiles.)

\"If your children visit this place, they will be able to know what you
really are. How precious one\'s father is! If a person deceives his
father and mother in order to seek religion, he gets only worthless
trash.

**Man\'s several debts**

\"A man is born with several debts: debts to his father, the devas, and
the rishis. Besides, there is his debt to his mother. He also has a debt
to his wife; She must be supported. If the wife is chaste, the husband
must provide for her after his death.

\"I could not live at Vrindāvan on account of my mother. When I
remembered that my mother was living in the temple garden here at
Dakshineswar, I could not feel peaceful at Vrindāvan.

\"I ask people to live in the world and at the same time fix their minds
on God. I don\'t ask them to give up the world. I say, \'Fulfil your
worldly duties and also think of God.\' \"

DWIJA\'S FATHER; \"I tell my children that they should attend to their
studies. I don\'t forbid them to come to you, but I don\'t want them to
waste time in frivolities with the youngsters.\"

MASTER (referring to Dwija): \"This boy must have been born with some
good tendencies. Why are the two other brothers different from him? Why
is he alone spiritually minded? Will you be able to compel him not to
visit this place? Sooner or later everyone unfolds his inborn
tendencies.\"

DWIJA\'S FATHER: \"Yes, that is true.\"

Sri Ramakrishna came down from the couch and sat on the floor beside
Dwija\'s father. While talking with him he touched him now and then.

It was nearly evening. Sri Ramakrishna asked M. and the others to show
Dwija\'s father the temples. He said to them, \"I should have
accompanied him myself if I were well.\" He asked someone to give sweets
to the young men and said to Dwija\'s father: \"Let the children have a
little refreshment. It is customary.\" Dwija\'s father visited the
temples and the images and took a stroll in the garden.

Sri Ramakrishna engaged happily in conversation with Bhupen, Dwija, M.,
and others on the southeast porch of his room. He playfully slapped
Bhupen and M. on the back. He said to Dwija with a laugh, \"How I talked
to your father!\"

Dwija\'s father returned to Sri Ramakrishna\'s room after dusk. He
intended to leave shortly. He was feeling hot. Sri Ramakrishna fanned
him himself. In a few minutes the father took leave of the Master. Sri
Ramakrishna stood up to bid him farewell.

It was eight o\'clock. Sri Ramakrishna was talking to Mahimacharan.
Rākhāl , M., and one or two companions of Mahimacharan were in the room.
Mahimacharan was going to spend the night at the temple garden.

**Mahima\'s estimate of the devotees**

MASTER (to Mahima): \"Well, how do you find Kedār? Has he only seen
milk, or has he drunk it too?\"

MAHIMA \"Yes, he is enjoying bliss.\"

MASTER: \"Nityagopal?\"

MAHIMA \"Very good. He is in a lofty state of mind.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. Well, what about Girish Ghosh?\"

*Mahāvāyu*, the Spiritual

MAHIMA \"He too has developed nicely, but he belongs to another class.\"

MASTER: \"And Narendra?\"

MAHIMA \"He is now in the state I was in fifteen years ago.\"

MASTER: \"The younger Naren? How guileless he is!\"

MAHIMA \"Yes, quite guileless.\"

MASTER: \"You are right. (Reflecting a little) Let me see who else. It
will be sufficient for the youngsters who come here if they know only
two things. If they know these, they will not have to practise much
discipline and austerity. First, who I am, and second, who they are.
Many of the youngsters belong to the inner circle.

\"Those belonging to the inner circle will not attain liberation. I
shall have to assume a human body again, in a northwesterly direction.

\"I feel peace of mind when I see the youngsters. How can I feel joy at
the sightof those who have begotten children and are engaged in lawsuits
and are involved in \'woman and gold\'? How could I live without seeing
pure souled persons?\"

Mahimacharan recited some texts from the scriptures. He also described
various mystic rites of the Tantra.

MASTER: \"Well, some say that my soul, going into samādhi, lies about
like a bird in the Mahakasa, the Infinite Space.

**Different kinds of samādhi**

\"Once a sādhu of Hrishikesh came here. He said to me: \'There are five
kinds of samādhi. I find you have experienced them all. In these
samādhis one feels the sensation of the Spiritual Current to be like the
movement of an ant, a fish, a monkey, a bird, or a serpent.\'

\"Sometimes the Spiritual Current rises through the spine, crawling like
an ant.

\"Sometimes in samādhi the soul swims joyful in the ocean of divine
ecstasy, like a fish.

\"Sometimes, when I lie down on my side, I feel the Spiritual Current
pushing me like a monkey and playing with me joyfully. I remain still.

That Current, like a monkey, suddenly with one jump reaches the
Sahasrara. That is why you see me jump up with a start.

\"Sometimes, again, the Spiritual Current rises like a bird hopping from
one branch to another. The place where it rests feels like fire. It may
hop from Muladhara to Svadhisthana, from Svadhisthana to the heart, and
thus gradually to the head.

\"Sometimes, again, the Spiritual Current moves up like a snake. Going
in a jigzag way, at last it reaches the head and I go into samādhi.

**Awakening of Kundalini**

\"A man\'s spiritual consciousness is not awakened unless his kundalini
is aroused.\"The kundalini dwells in the Muladhara. Then it is aroused,
it passes along the Sushumna nerve, goes through the centres of
Svadhisthana,

Manipura, and so on, and at last reaches the head. This is called the
movement of Current. It culminates in samādhi.

\"One\'s spiritual consciousness is not awakened by the mere reading of
books. One should also pray to God. The kundalini is aroused if the
aspirant feels restless for God. To talk of knowledge from mere study
and

heresay! What will that accomplish?

\"Just before my attaning this state of mind, it had been revealed to me
how the kundalini is aroused, how the lotuses of the different centres
blossom forth, and how all this culminates in samādhi. This is a very
secret experience. I saw a boy twenty-two or twenty-three years old,
exactly resembling me, enter the Sushman nerve and commune with the
lotuses touching them with his tongue. He bagan with the centre at the
anus and passed through the centres at the sexual organ, naval, and so
on. The different lotuses of those centres-four-petalled, six-petalled,
ten-petalled, and so forth-had been drooping at his touch they stood
erect.

\"When he reached the heart-I distinctly remember it-and communed with
the lotuses there, touching it with his tongue, the twelve-petalled
lotus, which was hanging head down, stood erect and open its petals.
Then he came to the sixteen-petalled lotus in the throat and two
petalled lotus in the forehead. And last of all, the thousand-petalled
lotus in the head blossomed. Since then I have been in this state.\"

Sri Ramakrishna came down to the floor and sat near Mahimacharan. M. and
a few other devotees were near him. Rākhāl also was in the room.

MASTER (to Mahima): \"For a long time I have wanted to tell you my
spiritual experiences, but I could not. I feel like telling you today.

**Master\'s intimate vision of God**

\"You say that by mere *sādhanā* one can attain a state of mind like
mine. But it is not so. There is something special here \[referring to
himself\].\"

Rākhāl , M., and the others became eager to hear what the Master was
going to say.

MASTER: \"God talked to me. It was not merely His vision. Yes, He talked
to me. Under the banyan-tree I saw

Him coming from the ganges. Then we laughed so much! By way of playing
with me He cracked my fingers.

Then He talked. Yes, He talked to me.

\"For three days I wept continuously. And He revealed to me what is in
the Vedas, the Puranas, the Tantras, and the other scriptures.

**Master\'s vision of māyā**

\"One day He showed me the māyā of Mahamaya. A small light inside a room
began to grow, and at last it enveloped the whole universe.\'

\"Further, He revealed to me a huge reservoir of water covered with
green scum. The wind moved a little of the scum and immediately the
water became visible; but in the twinkling of an eye, scum from all
sides came dancing in and again covered the water. He revealed to me
that the water was like Satchidananda, and the scum like māyā. On
account of māyā, Satchidananda is not seen. Though now and then one may
get a glimpse of It, again māyā covers It.

**Master saw devotees before their arrival**

\"God reveals the nature of the devotees to me before they arrive. I saw
Chaitanya\'s party singing and dancing near the Panchavati, between the
banyan-tree and the bakul-tree. I noticed Balarām there. If it weren\'t:
for him, who would there be to supply me with sugar candy and such
things? (Pointing to M.) And I saw him too. \"I had seen Keshab before I
actually met him-I had seen him and his party in my samādhi. In front of
me sat a roomful of men. Keshab looked like a peacock sitting with its
tail spread out. The tail meant his followers. I saw a red gem on
Keshab\'s head. That indicated his rajas. He said to his disciples,
\'Please listen to what he \[meaning the Master\] is saying.\' I said to
the Divine Mother: \'Mother, these people hold the views of
\"Englishmen\". Why should I talk to them?\' Then the Mother explained
to me that it would be like this in the Kaliyuga.

\"Keshab and his followers got from here \[meaning himself\] the names
of Hari and the Divine Mother: That is why the Divine Mother took Vijay
away from Keshab\'s party. But Vijay did not join the Adi Samaj.

(Pointing to himself) \"There must be something special here. Long ago a
young man named Gopal Sen used to visit me. He who dwells in me placed
His foot On Gopal\'s chest. Gopal said in an ecstatic mood: \'you will
have to wait here a long time. I cannot live any more with worldly
people.\' He took leave of me. Afterwards I heard that he was dead.
Perhaps he was born as Nityagopal.

**About Narendra**

\"I have had many amazing visions. I had a vision of the Indivisible
Satchidananda. Inside It I Saw two groups with a fence between them. On
one side were Kedār, Chuni, and other devotees who believe in the
Personal God. On the other side was a luminous space like a heap of red
brick-dust. Inside it was seated Narendra immersed in samādhi. Seeing
him absorbed in meditation, I called aloud, \'Oh, Narendra!\' He opened
his eyes a little. I came to realize that he had been born, in another
form, in Simla in a kayastha family. At once I said to the Divine
Mother, \'Mother, entangle him in māyā; otherwise he will give up his
body in samādhi.\' Kedār, a believer in the Personal God, peeped in and
ran away with a shudder.

**Master about himself**

\"Therefore I feel that it is the Divine Mother Herself who dwells in
this body and plays with the devotees. When I first had my exalted state
of mind, my body would radiate light. My chest was always flushed. Then
I said to the Divine Mother: \'Mother, do not reveal Thyself outwardly.
Please go inside.\' That is why my complexion is so dull now. If my body
were still luminous, people would have tormented me; a crowd would
always have thronged here. Now there is no outer manifestation. That
keeps weeds away. Only genuine devotees will remain with me now. Do you
know why I have this illness? It has the same significance. Those whose
devotion to me has a selfish motive behind it will run away at the sight
of my illness.

\"I cherished a desire. I said to the Mother, \'O Mother, I shall be the
king of the devotees.\'

\"Again, this thought arose in my mind: \'He who sincerely prays to God
will certainly come here. He must.\' You see, that is what is happening
now. Only people of that kind come.

\"My parents knew who dwells inside this body. Father had a dream at
Gaya. In that dream Raghuvir said to him, \'I shall be born as your
son.\'

\"God alone dwells inside this body. Such renunciation of \'woman and
gold!\' Could I have accomplished that myself? I have never enjoyed a
woman, even in a dream.

**Totapuri**

\"Nangta instructed me in Vedānta. In three days I went into samādhi. At
the sight of my samādhi under the madhavi vine, he was quite taken aback
and exclaimed, \'Ah! What is this?\' Then he came to know who resides in
this body. He said to me, \'Please let me go.\' At these words of
Totapuri, I went into an ecstatic mood and said, \'You cannot go till I
realize the Truth of Vedānta.\'

\"Day and night I lived with him. We talked only Vedānta. The Brahmani
used to say to me: \'Don\'t listen to Vedānta. It will injure your
devotion to God.\'

**Mathur Babu**

\"I said to the Divine Mother: \'Mother, please get me a rich man. If
You don\'t, how shall I be able to protect this body? How shall I be
able to keep the sādhus and devotees near me?\' That is why Mathur Babu
provided for my needs for fourteen years.

\"He who dwells in me tells me beforehand what particular class of
devotees will come to me. When I have a vision of Gaurānga, I know that
devotees of Gaurānga are coming. When I have a vision of Ran, the Saktas
come.

\"At the time of the evening service I used to cry out from the roof of
the kuthi, weeping: \'Oh, where are you all? Come to me!\' You see, they
are all gathering here, one by one.

\"God Himself dwells in this body. It is He who, of His own accord, is
working with these devotees.

\"What a wonderful state of mind some of the devotees have! The younger
Naren gets kumbhaka without any effort, and samādhi too. Sometimes he
stays in an ecstatic mood for two and a half hours; sometimes even more.
How wonderful!

\"I have practised all kinds of *sādhanā*: Jnāna yoga, karma yoga, and
bhakti yoga. I have even gone through the exercises of hathayoga to
increase longevity. There is another Person dwelling in this body.
Otherwise, after attaining samādhi, how could I live with the devotees
and enjoy the love of God? Koar Singh used to say to me: \'I have never
before seen a person who has returned from the plane of samādhi. You are
none other than Nanak.\'

\"I live in the midst of worldly people; on all sides I see \'woman and
gold\'. Nevertheless, this is the state of my mind: unceasing samādhi
and bhava. That is the reason Pratap said, at the sight of my ecstatic
mood: \'Good heavens! It is as if he were possessed by a ghost!\' \"

Rākhāl , M., and the others were speechless as they drank in this
account of Sri Ramakrishna\'s unique experiences.

But did Mahimacharan understand the import of these words? Even after
hearing them, he said to the Master, \"These things have happened to you
on account of your meritorious actions in your past births.\" Mahima
still thought that Sri Ramakrishna was a sādhu or a devotee of God. The
Master nodded assent to Mahima\'s words and said: \"Yes, the result of
past actions. God is like an aristocrat who has many mansions. Here
\[referring to himself\] is one of His drawing-rooms. The bhakta is
God\'s drawing-room.\"

It was nine o\'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the
small couch. It was Mahimacharan\'s desire to form a brahmachakra in the
presence of the Master. Mahima formed a circle, on the floor, with
Rākhāl , M., Kishori, and one or two other devotees. He asked them all
to meditate. Rākhāl went into an ecstatic state. The Master came down
from the couch and placed his hand on Rākhāl \'s chest, repeating the
name of the divine Mother. Rākhāl regained consciousness of the outer
world.

It was one o\'clock in the morning, the fourteenth day of the dark
fortnight of the moon. There was intense darkness everywhere. One or two
devotees were pacing the concrete embankment of the Ganges. Sri
Ramakrishna was up. He came out and said to the devotees, \"Nangta told
me that at this time, about midnight, one hears the Anāhata sound.\"

In the early hours of the morning Mahimacharan and M. lay down on the
floor of the Master\'s room. Rākhāl slept on a camp cot. Now and then
Sri Ramakrishna paced up and down the room with his clothes off, like a
five-year-old child.

**Monday, August 10**

It was dawn. The Master was chanting the name of the Divine Mother. He
went to the porch west of his room and looked at the Ganges; then he
stopped in front of the pictures of different gods and goddesses in the
room and bowed to them. The devotees left their beds, saluted Sri
Ramakrishna, and went out.

The Master was talking to a devotee in the Panchavati. The latter had
dreamt of Chaitanyadeva.

MASTER (in an ecstatic mood): \"Ah me! Ah me!\"

DEVOTEE: \"But, sir, it was only a dream.\"

MASTER: \"Is a dream a small thing?\"

The Master\'s voice was choked. His eyes were filled with tears.

Sri Ramakrishna was told of a devotee who had divine visions even while
he was awake. The Master said: \"I am not surprised. Narendra, too, sees
forms of God nowadays.\"

Mahimacharan went to one of the Śiva temples to the west of the
courtyard and chanted hymns from the Vedas. He was alone.

It was eight o\'clock in the morning. M. bathed in the Ganges and came
to Sri Ramakrishna. The brahmani who was grief-stricken on account of
her daughter\'s death also entered the room.

The Master asked the brahmani to give M. some prasad to eat.

BRAHMANI: \"Please eat something yourself first; then he will eat.

MASTER (to M.): \"Take some prasad of Jagannath first and then eat.\"

After eating the prasad, M. went to the Śiva temples and saluted the
Deity. Then he returned to the Master\'s room and saluted him. He was
ready to go to Calcutta.

MASTER (tenderly): \"Go home safely. You have to attend to your
duties.\"

**Tuesday, August 11**

Sri Ramakrishna was in his room at the temple garden. He had been
observing silence since eight o\'clock in the morning. Did he know the
fatal nature of his illness? At his silence the Holy Mother wept. Rākhāl
and Lātu also wept. The brahmani widow from Baghbazar arrived. She too
was weeping at this strange mood of the Master. Now and then the
devotees asked him whether he would remain silent for good. The Master
answered them in the negative, by a sign.

At three o\'clock in the afternoon Narayan arrived. Sri Ramakrishna said
to him, \"The Divine Mother will bless you,\" Narayan told the other
devotees that the Master had spoken to him. A heavy weight was lifted
from their breasts. They all came into the Master\'s room and sat on the
floor.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"The Mother showed me that all this is verily
māyā. She alone is real, and all else is the splendour of Her māyā.

\"Another thing was revealed to me. I found out how far the different
devotees have progressed.\"

DEVOTEES: \"Please tell us about it.\"

MASTER: \"I came to know about all these devotees: Nityagopal, Rākhāl ,
Narayan? Purna, Mahima Chakravarty, and the others.\"

**Sunday, August 16, 1885**

The news of Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness had been reported to the devotees
in Calcutta. They thought it was just a sore in his throat. Many
devotees arrived at Dakshineswar to visit him. Among them were Girish,
Ram, Nityagopal, Mahima, Kishori, and Pundit Shashadhar.

Sri Ramakrishna was in his usual happy mood. He was talking to the
devotees.

MASTER: \"I cannot tell the Mother about my illness. I feel ashamed to
talk of it.\"

GIRISH: \"God will cure you.\"

RAM: \"Yes, you will be all right.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, give me your blessing.\" (All laugh.)

Girish was a recent visitor to Dakshineswar. The Master said to him:
\"You have so many duties to perform.

You have to face so many troubles. Come here only three times more.

(To Shashadhar) \"Please tell us something about the *Ādyāśakti*.\"

SHASHADHAR: \"What do I know, sir?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"A certain man had great respect for another man. The
second man asked him to bring him a little fire for his tobacco. He
answered humbly, \'Sir, am I fit to carry your fire?\' He didn\'t bring
the fire.\" (All laugh.)

SHASHADHAR: \"The Primal Power alone is both the instrumental and the
material cause of the universe. It is She who has created the universe
and its living beings; further, She Herself has become all these. To
give an example: the spider, as the instrumental cause, makes the web
and, as the material cause, brings the web out of its own body.\"

**Brahman and Śakti**

MASTER: \"It is also stated that He who is Purusha is also Prakriti; He
who is Brahman is also Śakti. He is called Purusha or Brahman when He is
inactive, that is to say, when He ceases to create, preserve, or
destroy; and He is called Śakti or Prakriti when He engages in those
activities. But He who is Brahman is none other than Śakti; He who is
Purusha has verily become Prakriti. Water is water whether it moves or
is still. A snake is a snake whether it wriggles along or stays still
and coiled up.

\"What Brahman is cannot be described. Speech stops there. In the kirtan
the singers at first sing: \'My Nitai dances like a mata hati.\' As they
become more and more ecstatic, they can hardly utter the whole sentence.
They sing only: \'Hati! Hati!\' As their mood deepens they sing only:
\'Ha! Ha!\' At last they cannot sing even that; they become completely
unconscious.\"

As the Master spoke these words, he himself became transfixed in
samādhi. He was standing.

Regaining consciousness of the world, he said, \"That which is beyond
both kshara and akshara cannot be described.\"

The devotees sat in silence.

MASTER: \"You cannot go into samādhi as long as your worldly experiences
are not finished, or as long as you have duties to perform.

(To Shashadhar) \"God is now making you perform such duties as
delivering lectures. You must do these things now. You will have peace
when your duties are finished. After completing her household duties,
the mistress of the family goes for her bath. She will not come back
then even if you shout after her.\"

**Thursday, August 27, 1885**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room at Dakshineswar. It was five
o\'clock in the afternoon. There were two or three devotees with him.
While with the devotees he never gave a thought to his physical illness,
often spending the whole day with them talking and singing.

Doctor Madhu was treating Sri Ramakrishna. He frequently visited the
Master at Dakshineswar, coming by country boat from Calcutta. The
devotees were very much worried about the Master; it was their secret
desire that the physician should see him daily. M. said to the Master,
\"Doctor Madhu is an experienced physician. It

will be nice if he sees you every day.\"

Pundit Shyamapada of Antpur arrived. It was dusk. The pundit went to the
bank of the Ganges to perform his evening worship; he had some amazing
visions during the worship. He returned to the Master\'s room and sat on
the floor. Sri. Ramakrishna had just finished meditation and the
chanting of the holy names. He was sitting on the small couch and M. on
the foot-rug. Rākhāl , Lātu, and the others were in and out of the room.

**Brahman is the innermost Reality**

MASTER (to M, pointing to the pundit): \"He is very nice. (To the
pundit) Where the mind attains peace by practising the discipline of
\'Neti, neti\', there Brahman is.

\"The king dwells in the inmost room of the palace, which has seven
gates. The visitor comes to the first gate. There he sees a lordly
person with a large retinue, surrounded on all sides by pomp and
grandeur. The visitor asks his companion, \'Is he the king?\' \'No\',
says his friend with a smile.

\"At the second and the other gates he repeats the same question to his
friend. He finds that the nearer he comes to the inmost part of the
palace, the greater is the glory, pomp, and grandeur. When he passes the
seventh gate he does not ask his companion whether it is the king; he
stands speechless at the king\'s immeasurable glory. He realizes that he
is face to face with the king. He hasn\'t the slightest doubt about
it.\"

PUNDIT: \"One sees God beyond the realm of māyā.\"

**Futility of mere scholarship**

MASTER: \"But after realizing God one finds that He alone has become
māyā, the universe, and all living beings. This world is no doubt a
\'framework of illusion\', unreal as a dream. One feels that way when
one discriminates following the process of \'Not this, not this\'. But
after the vision of God this very world becomes \'a mansion of mirth\'.

\"What will you gain by the mere study of scriptures? The pundits merely
indulge in reasoning.\"

PUNDIT: \"I hate the idea of being called a pundit.\"

MASTER: \"That is due to the grace of God. The pundits merely indulge in
reasoning. Some have heard of milk and some have drunk milk. After you
have the vision of God you will find that everything is Narayana. It is
Narayana Himself who has become everything.\"

The pundit recited a hymn to Narayana . Sri Ramakrishna was overwhelmed
with joy.

PUNDIT (quoting from the Gitā.): \"\'with the heart concentrated by
yoga, with the eye of evenness for all things, he beholds the Self in
all beings and all beings in the Self.\' \"

MASTER: \"Have you read the Adhyātma Rāmāyana?\"

PUNDIT: \"Yes, sir, a little.\"

MASTER: \"The book is filled with ideas of knowledge and devotion. The
life of Savari and the hymn by Ahalyā are filled with bhakti.

\'But you must remember one thing: God is very far away from the mind
tainted with worldliness.\"

PUNDIT: \"Yes, sir. God is far, far away from worldly intelligence. And
God is very near, where that does not exist. I visited a certain
Zamindār, one Mukherji of Uttarpara. He is now an elderly man; but he
listens only to stories and novels.\"

MASTER: \"It is further said in the Adhyātma Rāmāyana that God alone has
become the universe and its living

beings.\"

The pundit was delighted. He recited a hymn to that effect from the
tenth chapter of the Bhagavata:

> *O Krishna! Krishna! Mighty Yogi! Thou art the Primal Supreme
> Purusha:*
>
> *This universe, manifest and unmanifest, is Thy form, as the sages
> declare.*
>
> *Thou alone art the soul, the sense-organs, the Lord dwelling in the
> bodies of all:*
>
> *Thou art the subtle Great Prakriti, made of sattva, rajas, and tamas;
> Thou alone art the Purusha, the Lord dwelling in the bodies of all.*

As Sri Ramakrishna listened to the hymn he went into samādhi. He
remained standing. The pundit was seated.

The Master placed his foot on the pundit\'s lap and chest, and smiled.

The pundit clung to his feet and said, \"O Guru! Please give me God
Consciousness.\"

After the pundit had left the room Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: \"Don\'t
you see that what I have said is coming to pass? Those who have
sincerely practised meditation and japa must come here.\"

It was ten o\'clock. Sri Ramakrishna ate a little farina pudding and lay
down. He asked M. to stroke his feet. A few minutes later he asked the
disciple to massage his body and chest gently. He enjoyed a short nap.
Then he said to M.: \"Now go to sleep. Let me see if I can sleep better
when I am alone.\" He said to Ramlal, \"He \[meaning M.\] and Rākhāl may
sleep in the room.\"

**Friday, August 28**

It was dawn. Sri Ramakrishna was awake and meditating on the Divine
Mother. On account of his illness the devotees were deprived of his
sweet chanting of the Mother\'s name.

**Divine Incarnations act like men**

Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the small couch. He asked M., \"Well, why
have I this illness?\"

1.  \"People will not have the courage to approach you unless you
    resemble them in all respects. But they are amazed to find that in
    spite of such illness you don\'t know anything but God.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Balarām also said, \'If even you can be ill, then
why should we wonder about our illnesses?\'

Lakshmana was amazed to see that Rāma could not lift His bow on account
of His grief for Sita. \'Even

Brahman weeps, entangled in the snare of the five elements.\'\"

1.  \"Jesus Christ, too, wept like an ordinary man at the suffering of
    His devotees.\" MASTER: \"How was that?\"

**Jesus and Lazarus**

1.  \'There were two sisters, Mary and Martha. Lazarus was their
    brother. All three were devoted to Jesus. Lazarus died. Jesus was on
    His way to their house. One of the sisters, Mary, ran out to meet
    Him. She fell at His feet and said weeping, \'Lord, if You had been
    here, my brother would not have died!\' Jesus wept to see her cry.

\"Then Jesus went to the tomb of Lazarus and called him by name.
Immediately Lazarus came back to life and walked out of the tomb.\"

MASTER: \"But I cannot do those things.\"

1.  \"That is because you don\'t want to. These are miracles; therefore
    you aren\'t interested in them. These things draw people\'s
    attention to their bodies. Then they do not think of genuine
    devotion. That is why you don\'t perform miracles.

**Similarities between Christ and Sri Ramakrishna**

But there are many similarities between you and Jesus Christ.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"What else?\"

1.  \"You don\'t ask your devotees to fast or practise other
    austerities. You don\'t prescribe hard and fast rules about food.
    Christ\'s disciples did not observe the sabbath; so the Pharisees
    took them to task. Thereupon Jesus said: \'They have done well to
    eat. As long as they are with the bridegroom they must make merry.

MASTER: \"What does that mean?\"

1.  \"Christ meant that as long as the disciples live with the
    Incarnation of God, they should only make merry. Why should they be
    sorrowful? But when He returns to His own abode in heaven, then will
    come the days of their sorrow and suffering.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Do you find anything else in me that is similar to
Christ?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. You say: \'The youngsters are not yet touched by: \"woman
and gold\"; they will be able to assimilate instruction. It is like
keeping milk in a new pot: the milk may turn sour if it is kept in a pot
in which curd has been made.\' Christ also spoke like that.\"

MASTER: \"What did He say?\"

1.  \"\'If new wine is kept in an old bottle, the bottle may crack. If
    an old cloth is patched with new cloth, the old cloth tears away.\'

\"Further, you tell us that you and the Mother are one. Likewise, Christ
said, \'I and My Father are one.\' \"

MASTER (smiling): \"Anything else?\"

1.  \"You say to us, \'God will surely listen to you if you call on Him
    earnestly.\' So also Christ said, \'Knock and it shall be opened
    unto you.\'

MASTER: \"Well, if God has incarnated Himself again, is it a fractional
or a partial or a complete manifestation of God? Some say it is a
complete manifestation.\"

1.  \"Sir, I don\'t quite understand the meaning of complete or partial
    or fractional Incarnation. But I have understood, as \'you explained
    it, the idea of a round hole in a wall.\"

MASTER: \"Tell me about it.\"

1.  \"There is a round hole in the wall. Through it one is able to see
    part of the meadow on the other side of the wall. Likewise, through
    you one sees part of the Infinite God.\"

MASTER: \"True. You can see five or six miles of the meadow at a
stretch.\"

M. finished his bath in the Ganges and went to the Master\'s room. It
was eight o\'clock in the morning. He asked Lātu to give him the rice
prasad of Jagannath. The Master stood near him and said: \"Take this
prasad regularly. Those who are devotees of God do not eat anything
before taking the prasad.\"

M: \"Yesterday I got some prasad of Jagannath from Balarām Babu\'s
house. I take one or two grains daily.\"

M. saluted the Master and took his leave. Sri Ramakrishna said to him
tenderly: \"Come early in the morning tomorrow. The hot sun of the rainy
season is bad for the health.\"

**Monday, August 31, 1885**

Sri Ramakrishna was resting in his room. It was about eight o\'clock in
the evening. Though ill and suffering, he constantly devoted himself to
the welfare of the devotees. Sometimes he felt restless, like a child;
but the next moment he forgot all about his illness and became filled
with ecstatic love of God. His love for the devotees was like that of a
mother for her children.

**Purna\'s letter**

Two days earlier, on Saturday night, he had received a letter from
Purna. Purna had written: \"I am feeling extremely happy. Now and then I
cannot sleep at night for joy.\" After hearing the letter the Master had
remarked: \"I feel thrilled to hear this. Even later on, he will be able
to keep this bliss. Let me see the letter.\" He had pressed the letter
in the palm of his hand and said: \"Generally I cannot touch letters.
But this is a good letter.\" That same night, while the Master was in
bed, he had suddenly become covered with perspiration. He had sat up in
bed, saying, \"It seems to me that I shall not recover from this
illness.\" It had worried the devotees very much to hear this. The Holy
Mother had come to the Temple Garden to wait on Sri Ramakrishna and was
living in a room in the Nahabat. The devotees, with the exception of one
or two, were not aware of her presence. A woman devotee staying with the
Holy Mother had begun to pay frequent visits to Sri Ramakrishna in his
room. After a few days Sri Ramakrishna had said to her: \"You have been
here some time. What will people think about it? You had better go home
for a week or so.\"

Sri Ramakrishna lay in bed, on his side, with his back to the room.
After dusk Gangadhar and M. arrived from Calcutta. Gangadhar sat at the
feet of the Master, who was talking to M.

MASTER: \"Two boys came here the other day. One of them was Subodh. He
is Sankar Ghosh\'s great grandson. The other, Kshirode, is his
neighbour. They are nice boys. I told them I was ill and asked them to
go to you for instruction. Please look after them a little.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. They are our neighbours.\"

MASTER: \"The other day, again, I woke up covered with perspiration. I
don\'t understand this illness.\"

1.  \"We have decided to ask Bhagavan Rudra to see you once. He is an
    M.D. and an expert physician.\" MASTER: \"How much will he charge?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"His regular fee is twenty or twenty-five rupees.\" MASTER: \"Then
    don\'t bother about him.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"But we shall pay him four or five rupees at the most.\"

MASTER: \"Listen. Suppose you say this to him, \'Sir, please be kind
enough to come and see him.\' Hasn\'t he heard anything about this
place?\"

1.  \"Perhaps he has. He has almost agreed not to charge any fee. But we
    shall pay him a little. If we do that, he will come again.\"

MASTER: \"Ask Dr. Nitai to come. He is a good physician. But what will
the doctors do, I wonder? They press my throat and make my illness
worse.\"

It was nine o\'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna ate a little farina
pudding and had no difficulty in swallowing it. He said to M.
cheerfully:\"I was able to eat a little. I feel very happy.\"

**Tuesday, September 1**

Sri Ramakrishna was about to take his bath. A devotee was rubbing his
Body with oil on the verandah south of his room. M. came there after
finishing his bath in the Ganges and saluted the Master.

After bathing, Sri Ramakrishna wrapped himself in a towel and with
folded hands saluted the deities in the temples from afar. He could not
go to the temples because of his illness.

It was the sacred Janmasthami day, the birthday of Krishna. Ram and
other devotees had brought new clothes for Sri Ramakrishna. He put them
on and looked charming. Again he saluted the deities.

Gopal Ma brought her Gopala some food that she had prepared at her home
at Kamarhati. She said to the Master sorrowfully, \"But you won\'t eat
any of it.\"

MASTER: \"You see, I am ill.\"

GOPAL MA \"That is my bad luck. Please take a little in your hand.\"

MASTER: \"Please give me your blessing.\"

A devotee brought some sugar candy. Gopal Ma said, \"Let me take it to
the Holy Mother in the nahabat.\" The Master said: \"No, keep it here. I
give sweets to the devotees. Who wants to send a messenger a hundred
times to the nahabat for sugar candy? Let it be kept here.\"

It was eleven o\'clock in the morning. The devotees were gradually
arriving from Calcutta. Balarām, Narendra, the younger Naren, NavaGopal,
and a Vaishnava from katoa arrived. Rākhāl and Lātu were staying with
Sri Ramakrishna. A Punjabi sādhu had been staying in the Panchavati for
some days.

The younger Naren had a tumour on his forehead. Sri Ramakrishna was
strolling in the Panchavati with the devotees. He said to the younger
Naren: \"Why don\'t you have your tumour operated on? It is not in the
throat but only on the forehead. That is a simple thing. People have
their orchitis operated on.\"

The Punjabi sādhu was going along the footpath in the garden. The Master
said: \"I don\'t attract him. He has the attitude of a Jnāni. I find him
to be dry as wood.\"

Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees returned to the Master\'s room. The
conversation turned to Shyamapada Bhattacharya.

BALARĀM: \"Shyamapada said, \'When he, the Master, placed his foot on
Narendra\'s chest, Narendra went into bhava; but I didn\'t have that
experience\' \".

MASTER: \"Shall I tell you the truth about it? It is very difficult to
gather the dispersed mind when it is attached to \'woman and gold\'. The
pundit told me he was called upon to act as arbiter to settle people\'s
quarrels. Besides, he has to worry about his children. But the minds of
Narendra and other youngsters are not scattered like that; they are not
yet touched by \'woman and gold\'.

\"But Shyamapada is a grand person.\"

The Vaishnava from Katoa began to ask Sri Ramakrishna questions. He was
squint-eyed.

**About rebirth**

VAISHNAVA: \"Sir, is a man born again?\"

MASTER: \"It is said in the Gitā that a man is reborn with those
tendencies that are in his mind at the time of his death. King Bharata
thought of his deer at the time of death and was reborn as a deer.\"

VAISHNAVA: \"I could believe in rebirth only if an eye-witness told me
about it.\"

MASTER: \"I don\'t know about that, my dear sir. I cannot cure my own
illness, and you ask me to tell you what

happens after death!

\"What you are talking about only shows your petty mind. Try to
cultivate love of God. You are born as a human being only to attain
divine love. You have come to the orchard to eat mangoes; what need is
there of knowing how many thousands of branches and millions of leaves
there are in the orchard? To bother about what happens after death! How
silly!\"

**Girish and Master**

Girish Ghosh arrived in a carriage with one or two friends. He was
drunk. He was weeping as he entered the room. He wept, as he placed his
head on Sri Ramakrishna\'s feet.

Sri Ramakrishna affectionately patted him on the back. He said to a
devotee, \"Prepare a smoke for him.\" Girish raised his head and said
with folded hands: \"You alone are the Perfect Brahman! If that is not
so then everything is false.

\"It is such a pity that I could not be of any service to you,\" He
uttered these words with a tenderness that made several devotees weep.

Girish continued: \"O Lord! Please grant me the boon that I may serve
you for a year. Who cares for salvation? One finds it everywhere. I spit
on it. Please tell me that you will accept my service for one year.\"

MASTER: \"People around here are not good. Some may criticize you.\"

GIRISH: \"I don\'t care. Please tell-\"

MASTER: \"All right. You may serve me when I go to your house.\"

GIRISH: \"No, it is not that. I want to serve you here.\"

Girish was insistent. The Master said, \"Well, that depends on God\'s
will.\"

Referring to the Master\'s throat trouble, Girish said: \"Please say,
\'Let it be cured.\' All right, I shall thrash it out. Kāli! Kāli!\"

MASTER: \"You will hurt me.\"

GIRISH: \"O throat, be cured! (He blows at the throat like an
exorciser.) Are you not all right? If you aren\'t cured by this time,
you certainly will be if I have any devotion to your feet. Say that you
are cured.\"

MASTER (sharply): \"Leave me alone. I can\'t say those things. I can\'t
ask the Divine Mother to cure my illness. \"All right. I shall be cured
if it is the will of God.\"

GIRISH: \"You are trying to fool me. All depends on your will.\"

MASTER: \"Shame! Never say that again. I look on myself as a devotee of
Krishna, not as Krishna Himself. You may think as you like. You may look
on your guru as God. Nevertheless, it is wrong to talk as you are
talking. You must not talk that way again.\"

GIRISH: \"Please say you will be cured.\"

MASTER: \"Very well, if that pleases you.\"

Girish was still under the influence of drink. Now and then he said to
Sri Ramakrishna, \"Well, sir, how is it that you were not born this time
with your celestial beauty?\"

A few moments later he said, \"I see, this time it will be the salvation
of Bengal.\"

A devotee said to himself: \"Why Bengal alone? It will be the salvation
of the whole world.\"

Girish said addressing the devotees: \"Does any of you understand why he
is here? It is for the liberation of men. Their suffering has moved him
to assume a human body.\"

The coachman was calling Girish. He got up and was going toward the man.
The Master said to M.: \"Watch him. Where is he going? I hope he won\'t
beat the coachman!\" M. accompanied Girish.

Presently Girish returned. He prayed to Sri Ramakrishna and said, \"O
God, give me purity that I may not have even a trace of sinful
thought.\"

MASTER: \"You are already pure. You have such faith and devotion! You
are in a state of joy, aren\'t you?\"

GIRISH: \"No, sir. I feel bad. I have worries. That is why I have drunk
so much liquor.\"

A few minutes afterwards Girish said: \"Lord, I am amazed to find that
I, even I, have been given the privilege of serving the Perfect Brahman.
What austerities have I practised to deserve this privilege?\"

Sri Ramakrishna took his midday meal. On account of his illness he ate
very little.

The Master\'s natural tendency of mind was to soar into the plane of
God-Consciousness. He would force his mind to be conscious of the body.
But, like a child, he was incapable of looking after his body. Like a
child he said to the devotees: \"I have eaten a little. I shall rest
now. You may go out for a little while.\" Sri Ramakrishna rested a few
minutes. The devotees returned to the room.

GIRISH: \"The guru and the Ishta. I like very much the form of the guru.
I am not afraid of him. Why should it be so? I am afraid of ecstasy. At
the sight of ecstasy I run away.\"

**The guru and the Chosen Ideal**

MASTER: \"He who is the Ishta appears in the form of the guru. The
aspirant practises meditation on a corpse. When he obtains the vision of
his Chosen Ideal, it is really the guru who appears to him and says,
\'This is that\', that is to say, he points out to the disciple his
Ishta. Uttering these words, the guru disappears into the form of the
Ishta. The disciple no longer sees the guru. In the state of perfect
Jnāna , who is the guru and who is the sishya? That creates a very
difficult situation; there the teacher and the disciple do not see each
other.\' \"

A DEVOTEE: \"Guru\'s head and disciple\'s feet.\"

GIRISH (joyously): \"Yes! Yes! It is true.\"

NAVAGOPAL: \"But listen to its meaning. The disciple\'s head belongs to
the guru; and the guru\'s feet belong to the disciple. Do you
understand?\"

GIRISH: \"No, that is not the meaning. Haven\'t you seen the child
climbing on the head of the father? That is why the disciple\'s feet are
mentioned.\"

NAVAGOPAL: \"But then the disciple must feel like a young baby.\"

**Two classes of devotees kitten and young monkey**

MASTER: \"There are two classes of devotees. One class has the nature of
the kitten. The kitten depends completely on its mother. It accepts
whatever its mother does for it. The kitten only cries, \'Mew, mew!\' It
doesn\'t know what to do or where to go. Sometimes the mother puts the
kitten near the heart, sometimes on the bed. Devotees of this class give
God the power of attorney and thus become free of all worry. The Sikhs

said to me that God was kind. I said to them: \'How is that? He is our
Father and our Mother. Shouldn\'t parents bring up their children after
begetting them?Do you mean to say that the neighbours will look after
them?\' Devotees of this class have an unwavering conviction that God is
our Mother and our Father.

\"There is another class of devotees. They have the nature of the young
monkey. The young monkey clings to its mother with might and main. The
devotees who behave like the young monkey have a slight idea of being
the doer. They feel: \'we must go to the sacred places; we must practise
japa and austerity; we must perform worship with sixteen articles as
prescribed by the sastras. Only then shall we be able to realize God.\'
Such is their attitude.

\"The aspirants of both classes are devotees of God. The farther you
advance, the more you will realize that God alone has become everything.
He alone does everything. He alone is the Guru and He alone is the
Ishta. He alone gives us knowledge and devotion.

\"The farther you advance, the more you will see that there are other
things even beyond the sandal-wood forest-mines of silver and gold and
precious gems. Therefore go forward.

**Worldly man\'s obstacles**

\"But how can I ask people to go forward? If worldly people go too far,
then the bottom will drop out of their world. One day Keshab was
conducting a religious service. He said, \'O God, may we all sink and
disappear in the river of bhakti!\' When the warship was over I said to
him: \'Look here. How can you disappear altogether in the river of
bhakti? If you do, what will happen to those seated behind the screen?
But do one thing: sink now and then, and come back again to dry
land.\"(All laugh.)

**Futility of argument**

The Vaishnava from Katoa was arguing.

MASTER (to the Vaishnava): \"Stop that sizzling noise! When butter
containing water is heated over a fire, it makes that sound.

\"If a man but once tastes the joy of God, his desire to argue takes
wing. The bee, realizing the joy of sipping honey, doesn\'t buzz about
any more. What will you achieve by quoting from books? The pundits
recite verses and do nothing else.

\"What will you gain by merely repeating \'siddhi\'? You will not be
intoxicated even by gargling with a solution of siddhi. It must go into
your stomach; not until then will you be intoxicated. One cannot
comprehend what I am saying unless one prays to God in solitude, all by
oneself, with a longing heart.\"

Dr. Rākhāl arrived to examine Sri Ramakrishna. The Master said to him
eagerly, \"Come in and sit down.\"

The conversation with the Vaishnava continued.

MASTER: \"Man should possess dignity and alertness. Only he whose
spiritual consciousness is awakened possesses this dignity and alertness
and can be called a man. Futile is the human birth without the awakening
of spiritual consciousness.

\"There are many men at Kamarpukur with big bellies and imposing
moustaches. Yet the villagers go with palanquins and bring righteous and
truthful persons from twenty miles away to arbitrate their quarrels.
They do not bring mere pundits.

\"Truthfulness is the *tapasya* of the Kaliyuga. \'Truthfulness,
submission to God, and looking on the wives of other men as one\'s own
mother\'-these are the means to realize God.\"

Like a child Sri Ramakrishna said to the physician, \"Sir, please cure
my throat.\"

DOCTOR: \"Do you ask me to cure you?\"

MASTER: \"The physician is Narayana Himself. I honour everybody. You may
say that if I look on all as Narayana then I should keep quiet. But I
also accept the words of the \'Mahut Narayana\'.

\"The Pure Mind and the Pure Ātman are one and the same thing. Whatever
comes up in the Pure Mind is the voice of God. God alone is the \'mahut
Narayana.\'

\"Why should I not listen to God? He alone is the Master. As long as He
keeps \'I-consciousness\' in me, I shall obey His orders.\"

The doctor was going to examine Sri Ramakrishna\'s throat. The Master
said, \"Dr. Mahendra Sarkar pressed my tongue the way they press a
cow\'s.\"

Like a child Sri Ramakrishna said to the physician, pulling at his
shirt-sleeves again and again, \"Sir! My dear sir! Please cure my
throat.\" Looking at the laryngoscope, he said with a smile: \"I know
it. You will see the reflection in it.\"

Narendra sang. But on account of the Master\'s illness there was not
much music.

**September 2**

After finishing his midday meal Sri Ramakrishna sat on the small couch
and talked to Dr. Bhagavan Rudra and M. Rākhāl , Lātu, and other
devotees were in the room. The physician heard all about the Master\'s
illness. Sri Ramakrishna came down to the floor and sat near the doctor.

MASTER: \"You see, medicine does not agree with me. My system is
different.

**Master\'s renunciation**

\"Well, what do you think of this? When I touch a coin my hand gets
twisted; my breathing stops. Further, if tie a knot in the comer of my
cloth, I cannot breathe. My breathing stops until the knot is untied.\"

The Master asked a devotee to bring a rupee. When Sri Ramakrishna held
it in his hand, the hand began to writhe with pain. The Master\'s
breathing also stopped. After the coin had been taken away, he breathed
deeply three times and his hand relaxed. The doctor became speechless
with wonder to see this strange phenomenon.

The doctor said to M., \"Action on the nerves.\"

MASTER (to the doctor): \"I get into another state of mind. It is
impossible for me to lay up anything. One day I visited Sambhu
Mallick\'s garden house. At that time I had been suffering badly from
stomach trouble. Sambhu said to me: Take a grain of opium now and then.
It will help you.\' He tied a little opium in a corner of my cloth. As I
was returning to the Kāli temple, I began to Vander about near the gate
as if unable to find the way. Then I threw the opium away and at once
regained my normal state. I returned to the temple garden.

\"One day at Kamarpukur I picked some mangoes. I was carrying them home.
But I could not walk; I had to stay standing in one place. Then I left
the mangoes in a hollow. Only after that could I return home. Well, how
do you explain that?\"

DOCTOR: \"There is a force behind it. Will-force.\"

M: \"He \[meaning the Master\] says that it is God-force. You say that
it is will-force.\"

MASTER (to the doctor): \"Again, I get into such a state of mind that if
someone says I am better, I at once

feel much better. The other day the brahmani said: \'You are fifty per
cent better.\' At once I began to dance.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was much pleased with the physician. He said to
him:\"You have a very fine nature. There are

two characteristics of knowledge: a peaceful nature and absence of
pride.\"

M:. \"The doctor has lost his wife.\"

MASTER (to the doctor): \"I say that God can be realized if one feels
drawn to Him by the intensity of these three attractions: the child\'s
attraction for the mother, the husband\'s attraction for the chaste
wife, and the attraction of worldly possessions for the worldly man.
\"Please cure me of my illness.\"

The doctor was going to examine the Master\'s throat Sri Ramakrishna was
seated in a chair on the semicircular porch.

eferring to Dr. Sarkar, the Master said: \"He is a villain. He pressed
my tongue as if I were a cow.\"

DOCTOR: \"He didn\'t hurt you purposely.\"

MASTER: \"No, he pressed the tongue to make a thorough examination.\"

**Sunday, September 20, 1885**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room, surrounded by devotees.
Nava-Gopal, Haralal, Rākhāl , Lātu, and others were present. A goswami
who was a musician was also there.

M. arrived with Dr. Rākhāl of Bowbazar. The physician began to examine
the Master. He was a stout person and had rather thick fingers.

MASTER (smiling, to the physician): \"Your fingers are like a
wrestler\'s. Mahendra Sarkar also examined me. He pressed my tongue so
hard that it hurt me. He pressed my tongue the way they press a
cow\'s.\"

DOCTOR: \"I shall not hurt you, sir.\"

The physician made out his prescription. Sri Ramakrishna was talking.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Well, people ask why, if I am such a holy
person, I should be ill.\"

TĀRAK: \"Bbagavan Das Babaji, too, was ill and bed-ridden a long time.\"

MASTER: \"But look at Dr. Madhu. At the age of sixty he carries food to
the house of his mistress; and he has no illness.\"

GOSWAMI: \"Sir, your illness is for the sake of others. You take upon
yourself the sins of those who come to you. You fall ill because you
accept their sins.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"You will soon be cured if only you say to the Divine
Mother, \'Mother, please make me well.\' \"

**Master could not ask God to cure him**

MASTER: \"I cannot ask God to cure my disease. The attitude of the
servant-master relationship is nowadays less strong in me.

Once in a while, I say, \'O Mother, please mend the sheath of the sword
a little.\' But such prayers are also becoming less frequent. Nowadays I
do not find my \'I\'; I see that it is God alone who resides in this
sheath.\"

The goswami had been invited to sing kirtan. A devotee asked, \"Will
there be any kirtan?\" Sri Ramakrishna was ill, and all were afraid that
the kirtan might throw his mind into ecstasy and thus aggravate the
illness.

Sri Ramakrishna said: \"Let there be a little singing. All are afraid of
my going into ecstasy. Spiritual emotion hurts the throat.\"

The goswami began the kirtan. Sri Ramakrishna could not control himself.

He stood up and began to dance with the devotees. The physician watched
the whole scene.

A hired carriage was waiting for Dr. Rākhāl . He and M. were ready to
leave for Calcutta. They saluted the Master. Sri Ramakrishna said to M.
affectionately, \"Have you had your meal?\"

**Thursday, September 24, 1885**

It was the night of the full moon. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the
small couch. He was very ill. M. and some other devotees were sitting on
the floor.

MASTER (to M.): \"Every now and then I think that the body is a mere
pillow-case. The only real substance is the Indivisible Satchidananda.

\"When I go into divine ecstasy this illness of the throat remains away
from me. I am now somewhat in that mood and so I feel like laughing.\"

Some ladies of Dwija\'s family arrived. They saluted the Master and sat
on one side. Pointing to one of the ladies, Sri Ramakrishna asked: \"Who
is this lady? Is it she who brought up Dwija? Why has Dwija bought an
ektara?\"

M: \"It has two strings, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Dwija\'s father is opposed to his views. Won\'t other people
criticize him? It is wise for him to pray to God secretly.\"

A picture of Gaurānga and Nitai hung on the wall of the Master\'s room.
It was a picture of the two brothers singing devotional songs with their
companions at Navadvip.

RAMLAL (to the Master): \"Then may I give him \[meaning M.\] the
picture?\"

MASTER: \"Yes.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was then under Dr. Pratap\'s treatment. He awoke at
midnight and felt extremely restless. Harish, his attendant was in the
room. Rākhāl also was there. Ramlal was asleep on the verandah. The
Master remarked later on: \"I was feeling extremely restless. I felt
like embracing Harish. They rubbed a little medicinal oil on my head.
Then I began to dance.\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 45**

SRI RAMAKRISHNA AT SYAMPUKUR

> October 18, 1885

THE DOCTORS HAD DEFINITELY diagnosed Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness as
cancer. No proper arrangement for his

treatment and nursing could be made at Dakshineswar. He needed the
constant attention of a physician, which

could not be given at the temple garden. Furthermore, the devotees who
lived in Calcutta found it very

inconvenient to attend on him daily at Dakshineswar. Therefore the older
devotees had rented a small two-

storey house in Baghbazar, Calcutta, and had brought the Master there.
Sri Ramakrishna, however, had not

liked the place and had gone to Balarām\'s house. In a few days a new
house had been engaged in Syampukur,

in the northern section of Calcutta, and the Master had been taken
there. He had been placed under the

treatment of Dr. Mahendra Lal Sarcar. The new building had two large
rooms and two smaller ones on the

second floor. One of the larger rooms was used as the parlour, and in
the other the Master lived. Of the two

smaller rooms, one was used as a sleeping-room by the devotees, and the
other by the Holy Mother when she

came there. Near the exit to the roof was a small, covered, square
space, where the Holy Mother stayed

during the day and prepared the Master\'s food.

It was Vijaya day, the fourth day of the worship of Durga, when the
image is immersed in water. On that day the Divine Mother returns to Her
heavenly abode at Mount Kailas, leaving gloom in the hearts of Her
devotees. It was eight o\'clock in the morning. The air was chilly.
Though ill, Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on his bed. He was like a five
year-old child who knows nothing but its mother. NavaGopal, M., and a
few other devotees were present.

**Master consoles Surendra**

Surendra arrived and sat down. The Divine Mother had been worshipped at
his house for the past three days. Sri Ramakrishna had not been able to
go there on account of his illness, but he had sent some of his
disciples. Surendra was in a very unhappy mood because on this day the
image of the Mother was to be immersed in the water.

SURENDRA \"I had to run away from home.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"What if the image is thrown into the water? May Mother
dwell in the heart!\"

Surendra was disconsolate. He was crying to the Divine Mother and
talking to Her. At this yearning of his beloved disciple Sri Ramakrishna
could not control his tears. He looked at M. and said in a choked voice:
\"What bhakti! Ah, what great love he feels for God!\"

MASTER (to Surendra): \"Yesterday evening at seven or seven-thirty I saw
your worship hall in a vision. I saw the divine image full of
effulgence. This place and your hall were joined by a stream of light
flowing between them.\"

SURENDRA \"At that time I was crying to the Mother in the worship hall.
My elder brothers had gone upstairs. I thought the Mother said, \'I will
come again.\' \" It was about eleven o\'clock in the morning. Sri
Ramakrishna finished his meal. M. poured water into his hand for him to
rinse his mouth.

MASTER (to M.): \"Rākhāl has indigestion.

**Praising the Gitā**

It is best to take only sattvic food. Haven\'t you read about it in the
Gitā? Don\'t you read the Gitā?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. The Gitā speak of temperance in eating Sattvic food,
    rajasic food, tamasic food; sattvic kindness, sattvic ego, and so
    on-all these are described in the Gitā.\"

MASTER: \"Have you a copy of the book?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"It contains the essence of all the scriptures.\"

1.  \'The Gitā describes various ways of realizing God. You too say that
    God can be reached by various paths: knowledge, devotion, work, and
    meditation.\"

**Secret of karma-yoga**

MASTER: \"Do you know the meaning of karma yoga? It is to surrender to
God the fruit of all action.\"

1.  \"Yes, sir, I have read that in the Gitā. It also says that there
    are three ways of performing action.\" MASTER: \"What are they?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"First, one may perform karma to attain Jnāna ; second, to teach
    others; third, under the impulse of one\'s nature.\"

After rinsing his mouth the Master chewed betel-leaf.

**M. and Dr. Sarkar**

Sri Ramakrishna was talking with M. about Dr. Sarkar. M. had been at the
doctor\'s house the previous day to report the Master\'s condition.

MASTER: \"What did you talk about?\"

1.  \"There are many books in the doctor\'s room. I took out one to
    read, and now and then read a passage aloud to Dr. Sarkar. It was a
    book by Sir Humphry Davy. He wrote about the necessity of Divine
    Incarnation.\"

MASTER: \"Indeed! What did you say to the doctor?\"

1.  \"There was one passage that stated that Divine Truth must be made
    human truth to be appreciated by us; therefore Divine Incarnation is
    necessary.\"

MASTER: \"Splendid! That\'s very good.\"

1.  \"The author gave the illustration of the sun: one cannot look at
    the sun, but one can look at its reflected rays.\"

MASTER: \"Very fine. Anything else?\"

M: \"Another passage stated that real knowledge is faith.\"

MASTER: \"That too is very good. If one has faith one has everything.\"

M: \"The author dreamt of the Roman gods and goddesses.\"

MASTER: \"Do such books really exist? Surely the author was inspired by
God. Did you talk of anything else?\"

1.  \"People like Dr. Sarkar speak of doing good to the world. So I told
    him what you had said about it.\" MASTER (smiling): \"What did I
    say?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"About Sambhu Mallick. He had said to you: \'It is my desire to
    devote my money to the building of schools, hospitals, dispensaries,
    and the like. That will do good to many.\' Thereupon you had said to
    him, \'Suppose God appears before you; will you then ask Him to
    build schools, hospitals, and dispensaries?\' I told the doctor

another thing.\"

MASTER: \'Those who are born to do work belong to a different class.
What else did you say?\"

1.  \"I said to the doctor: \'If your aim is to visit the image of
    Mother Kāli, what will you gain by spending all your time in giving
    alms to the poor by the roadside? First you had better somehow visit
    the image. Afterwards you may give alms to your heart\'s content.\"

MASTER: \"Did you talk about anything else?\"

1.  \"Yes. I told him that many of those who come to you have conquered
    lust. Thereupon the doctor replied, \'I too have conquered lust.\' I
    said: \'You are a great man. It is no wonder that you have conquered
    lust. But the amazing thing is that under his influence even
    insignificant creatures have conquered it.\' Afterwards I told him
    what you had said to Girish.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"What did I say?\"

1.  \"You said to Girish, \'The doctor has not been able to surpass
    you.\' You said that with reference to his calling you a Divine
    Incarnation.\"

MASTER: \"Discuss the doctrine of Divine Incarnation with Dr. Sarkar. He
who liberates others is an Incarnation of God. The scriptures speak of
ten, of twenty-four, and also of innumerable Incarnations.\"

1.  \"Dr.Sarkar is keenly interested in Girish Ghosh. He always asks me
    whether Girish has given up drinking. He keeps a sharp eye on him.\"

MASTER: \"Did you tell Girish about that?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir, I did. And I also told him about giving up drinking.\"
    MASTER: \"What did he say?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"He said: \'Since you all say so, I take your words as the words of
    the Master himself. But I won\'t promise anything.\' \"

MASTER (joyously): \"Kalipada told me that he had altogether given up
drinking.\"

It was afternoon. Dr.Sarkar arrived accompanied by his son Amrita and
Hem. Narendra and other devotees were present.

Sri Ramakrishna was talking aside to Amrita. He asked him, \"Do you
meditate?\" He further said to him: \"Do you know!\" what one feels in
meditation? The mind becomes like a continuous flow of oil-it thinks of
one object only, and that is God. It does not think of anything else.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was talking to the devotees.

MASTER (to the doctor): \"Your son does not believe in the Incarnation
of God. That\'s all right, It doesn\'t matter if he does not believe in
it.

**Master praises doctor\'s son**

\"Your son is a nice boy. Why shouldn\'t he be? Does a mango-tree of the
fine \'Bombay\' variety ever bear Sour mangoes? How firm his faith in
God is! That man is a true man whose mind dwells on God. He alone is a
man whose spiritual consciousness has been awakened and who is firmly
convinced that God alone is real and all else illusory. He does not
believe in Divine Incarnation; but what does that matter? It is enough
if he believes

that God exists, and that all this universe and its living beings are
the manifestations of His Power-like a rich man and his garden.

**On Divine Incarnation**

\"Some say that there are ten Divine Incarnations, some twenty-four,
while others say that there are innumerable Incarnations. If you see
anywhere a special manifestation of God\'s Power, you may know that God
has incarnated Himself there. That is my opinion.

**Absolute and Relative**

\"There is another view, according to which God has become all that you
see. It is like a bel-fruit, which consists of three parts: seeds,
shell, and flesh. That which is the Absolute has also its relative
aspect, and that which is the Relative has also its absolute aspect. You
cannot set aside the Absolute and understand just the Relative. And it
is only because there is the Relative that you can transcend it step by
step and reach the Absolute.

\"So long as \'I-consciousness\' exists, a man cannot go beyond the
Relative. Through meditation he can negate the phenomena, following the
process of \'Neti, neti\', and reach the Absolute; but nothing can
really be denied, as in the instance of the bel-fruit.\"

DOCTOR: \"Quite true.\"

MASTER: \"Kacha had been immersed in nirvikalpa samādhi. When his mind
was coming down to the relative plane, someone asked him, \'What do you
see now?\' Kacha replied: \'I see that the universe is soaked, as it
were, in God. Everything is filled with God. It is God alone who has
become all that I see. I do not know what to accept and what to
reject.\'

\"In my opinion one should realize both the Nitya and the Lila and then
live in the world as the servant of God. Hanuman saw both the Personal
God and the formless Reality. He then lived as a devotee of God, as His
servant.\"

1.  (to himself): \"So we must accept both-the Absolute and the
    Relative. Since the introduction of the Vedānta philosophy in
    Germany, some of the European philosophers, too, have been thinking
    along that line. But the Master says that one cannot realize both
    the Nitya and the Lila without complete renunciation, that is to
    say, without totally giving up \'woman and gold\'. Such a person
    must be a true renouncer; he must be totally detached from the
    world. Here lies the real difference between him and such European
    philosophers as Hegel\"

**Dr. Sarkar on Incarnation**

In Dr. Sarkar\'s opinion, God created men and ordained that every soul
should make infinite progress. He would not believe that one man was
greater than another. That was why he did not believe in the doctrine of
Divine Incarnation.

DOCTOR: \"I believe in infinite progress. If that is not so, then what
is the use of leading a mere five or six years\' existence in the world?
I would rather hang myself with a rope round my neck.

\"Incarnation! What is that? To cower before a man who excretes filth!
It is absurd. But if you speak of a man as the reflection of God\'s
Light-yes, that I admit.\"

GIRISH (smiling): \"But you have not seen God\'s Light.\"

Dr. Sarkar was hesitating before giving a reply. A friend who sat near
him whispered something into his ear.

DOCTOR (to Girish): \"You too have not seen anything but a reflection.\"

GIRISH: \"I see It! I see the Light! I shall prove that Sri Krishna is
an Incarnation of God or I shall cut out my

tongue!\"

**Futility of discussion**

MASTER: \"All this is useless talk. It is like the ravings of a
delirious patient. A delirious patient says, \'I shall drink a whole
tank of water; I shall eat a whole pot of rice.\' The physician says:
\'Yes, yes. You will have all these. We shall give you whatever you want
when you are convalescent.\'

\"When butter is heated it sizzles and crackles. But all sound comes to
a stop when it is thoroughly boiled. As a man\'s mind is, so is his
conception of God. I have seen in rich men\'s houses portraits of the
Queen and other aristocrats. But the devotees keep in their houses
pictures of gods and goddesses.

**Go beyond knowledge and ignorance**

\"Lakshmana said, \'O Rāma, even a sage like Vasishthadeva was overcome
with grief on account of the death of his sons!\' \'Brother,\' replied
Rāma, \'whoever has knowledge has ignorance also. Whoever is conscious
of light is also conscious of darkness. Therefore go beyond knowledge
and ignorance.\' One attains that state through an intimate knowledge of
God. This knowledge is called vijnāna .

\"When a thorn enters the sole of your foot you have to get another
thorn. You then remove the first thorn with the help of the second
Afterwards you throwaway both. Likewise, after removing the thorn of
ignorance with the help of the thorn of knowledge, you should throwaway
the thorns of both knowledge and ignorance.

\"There are signs of Perfect Knowledge. One is that reasoning comes to
an end. As I have just said, the butter sizzles and crackles as long as
it is not thoroughly boiled.\"

Doctor: \"But can one retain Perfect Knowledge permanently? You say that
all is God. Then why have you taken up this profession of a paramahamsa?
And why do these people attend on you? Why don\'t you keep silent?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Water is water whether it is still or moves or
breaks into waves.

**The story of the \"Māhut Narayana\"**

\"I must tell you something else. Why should I not listen to the \'mahut
Narayana\'? The guru had taught his disciple that everything was
Narayana . A mad elephant was coming toward the disciple, but he did not
move away since he believed the guru\'s words. He thought that the
elephant was Narayana . The mahut shouted to him: \'Get away! Get
away!\' But the disciple did not move. The elephant picked him up and
threw him to the ground. The disciple was not quite dead; when his face
was sprinkled with water he regained consciousness. Being asked why he
had not moved away, he said: \'why should I? The guru said, \"Everything
is Narayana.\"\' \'But, my child,\' said the Guru, \'Why didn\'t you
listen to the words of the mahut Narayana ?\'

\"It is God who dwells within as the Pure Mind and Pure Intelligence. I
am the machine and He is its Operator. I am the house and He is the
Indweller. It is God who is the mahut Narayana.\"

DOCTOR: \"Let me ask you something. Why do you ask me to cure your
illness?\"

MASTER: \"I talk that way as long as I am conscious of the \'jar\' of
the \'ego\'. Think of a vast ocean filled with water on all sides. A jar
is immersed in it. There is water both inside and outside the jar; but
the water does not become one unless the jar is broken. It is God who
has kept this \'jar\' of the \'ego\' in me.\"

DOCTOR: \"What is the meaning of \'ego\' and all that you are talking
about? You must explain it to me. Do you mean to say that God is playing
tricks on us?\"

GIRISH: \"Sir, how do you know that He is not playing tricks?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"It is God who has kept this \'ego\' in us. All this
is His play, His Lila. A king has four sons. They are all princes; but
when they play, one becomes a minister, another a police officer, and so
on. Though a

prince, he plays as a police officer.

(To the doctor) \"Listen. If you realize Ātman you will see the truth of
all I have said. All doubts disappear after the vision of God.\"

DOCTOR: \"But is it ever possible to get rid of all doubts?\"

MASTER: \"Learn from me as much as I have told you. But if you want to
know more, you must pray to God in solitude. Ask Him why He has so
ordained.

\"The son of the house can give a beggar only a small measure of rice.
But if the beggar asks for his train fare, then the master of the house
must be called.\"

The doctor remained silent.

**Master reasons with Dr. Sarkar**

MASTER: \"Well, you love reasoning. All right. Let us reason a little.
Listen. According to the Jnāni there is no Incarnation of God. Krishna
said to Arjuna: \'You speak of Me as an Incarnation of God. Let me show
you something. Come with Me.\' Arjuna had followed Sri Krishna a short
distance, when Sri Krishna asked him, \'What do you see there?\' Arjuna
replied, \'A big tree with black berries hanging in bunches.\' Krishna
said, \'Those are not black berries. Go nearer and look at them.\'
Arjuna went nearer and saw that they were Krishnas hanging in bunches.
\'Do you see now\', said Krishna, \'how many Krishnas like Me have grown
there?\'

\"Kavirdas said of Krishna, \'He danced like a monkey to the clapping of
the gopis!\'

\"As you go nearer to God you see less and less of His *Upādhis*, His
attributes. A devotee at first may see the Deity as the ten-armed Divine
Mother; when he goes nearer he sees Her possessed of six arms; still
nearer, he sees the Deity as the two-armed Gopala. The nearer he comes
to the Deity, the fewer attributes he sees. At last, when he comes into
the presence of the Deity, he sees only Light without any attributes.

\"Listen a little to the Vedantic reasoning. A magician came to a king
to show his magic. When the magician moved away a little, the king saw a
rider on horseback approaching him. He was brilliantly arrayed and had
various weapons in his hands. The king and the audience began to reason
out what was real in the phenomenon before them. Evidently the horse was
not real, nor the robes, nor the armour. At last they found out beyond
the shadow of a doubt that the rider alone was there. The significance
of this is that Brahman alone is real and the world unreal Nothing
whatsoever remains if you analyse.\"

DOCTOR: \"I don\'t object to this.\"

**Illusion persists**

MASTER: \"But it is not easy to get rid of illusion. It lingers even
after the attainment of Knowledge. A man dreamt of a tiger. Then he woke
up and his dream vanished. But his heart continued to palpitate.

\"Some thieves came to a field. A straw figure resembling a man had been
put there to frighten intruders. The thieves were scared by the figure
and could not persuade themselves to enter the field. One of them,
however, approached and found that it was only a figure made of straw.
He came back to his companions and said, \'There is nothing to be afraid
of.\' But still they refused to go; they said that their hearts were
beating fast. Then the daring thief laid the figure on the ground and
said, \'It is nothing, it is nothing.\' This is the process of \'Neti,
neti\'.\"

DOCTOR: \"These are fine words.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"What kind of words?\"

DOCTOR: \"Fine.\"

MASTER: \"Then give me a \'Thank you\'.\" \[The Master said the words
\"thank you\" in English.\]

DOCTOR: \"Don\'t you know what is in my mind? I go to so much trouble to
come and visit you!\"

MASTER (smiling): \"No, it is not that. Say something for the good of
the ignorant. After the death of Ravana ,

his brother Bibhishana refused to be king of Ceylon! He said: \'O Rāma,
I have obtained You. What shall I do with kingship?\' Rāma said:
\'Bibhishana, be king for the sake of the ignorant, for those who might
ask what riches you have gained by serving Me so much. Be king to give
them a lesson.\"

DOCTOR: \"Are there such ignorant people here?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Oh, yes! Here you will find oysters and snails as
well as conchs.\" (All laugh.)

Doctor Sarkar, who was a homeopath, gave Sri Ramakrishna two globules of
medicine. He said, \"I am giving you these two globules: one is Purusha
and the other is Prakriti.\" (All laugh,)

MASTER (smiling): \"Oh yes, Purusha and Prakriti are always together.
Haven\'t you observed pigeons? The male and female cannot live
separately. Wherever Purusha is, there is Prakriti, and wherever
Prakriti is, there is Purusha.\"

It was Vijaya day. Sri Ramakrishna asked Dr. Sarkar to have some
refreshments. The devotees served him with sweets.

DOCTOR (while eating): \"Now I say \'Thank you\' for the sweets; but it
is not for your teachings. Why should I give that \'Thank you\' in
words?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"The essential thing is to fix the mind on God and to
practise meditation a little. What more shall I say? (Pointing to the
younger Naren) Look at him. His mind totally merges in God. Those things
I was telling you-\"

DOCTOR: \"Tell the others also.\"

MASTER: \"No, a man should be given food according to his power of
digestion. Can all understand what I told you? I cannot talk to everyone
as I talked to you. Suppose a mother has bought a fish for the family.
All her children have not the same power of digestion. For some she
makes pilau and for others she makes stew. These latter have weak
stomachs.\" (All laugh.)

Dr. Sarkar took his leave. It was Vijaya day, when people show their
love and respect to their friends and elders with appropriate greetings.
The devotees all prostrated themselves before Sri Ramakrishna and took
the dust of his feet. Then they embraced one another. Their joy knew no
bounds. The Master was seriously ill, but he made them all forget about
his illness. The embracing and exchange of greetings continued a long
time. The devotees also took light refreshments. The younger Naren, M.,
and a few other devotees sat near Sri Ramakrishna. The Master talked to
them joyfully. He spoke of Dr.Sarkar.

MASTER: \"I shall not have to tell him very much. When the trunk of a
tree is cut almost to the other side, the cutter steps aside. A little
later the tree falls down of itself.\"

THE YOUNGER NAREN (smiling): \"Here everything is principle!\"

MASTER (to M.): \"The doctor has already changed a great deal, hasn\'t
he?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. When he comes here he loses his wits. He never talks
    about medicine. When we remind him of it, he says: \'Oh, yes, yes! I
    shall have to give the medicine.\' \"

Some of the devotees were singing in the parlour. They returned to the
Master\'s room. Sri Ramakrishna said: \"I heard your music; but why did
you make mistakes in the rhythm? I once heard of a man who was an adept
in discord. You sang like him.\" (All laugh.)

A young man, a relative of the younger Naren, arrived. He was
bespectacled and foppishly dressed. Sri Ramakrishna spoke to the younger
Naren.

MASTER: \"You see, a young man was going along the road. He had put on a
pleated shirt. And how he strutted! Now and again he would display the
shirt by removing his scarf, and then look around to see if anyone was
admiring him. But when he walked you could see that he was knock-kneed.
(All laugh.) The peacock displays its feathers; but its feet are very
dirty. (All laugh.) The camel is very ugly. Everything about it is
ugly.\"

YOUNG MAN: \"But it acts well.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. But it browses on briars. It will continue to eat thorns
though its mouth bleeds. The worldly man loses his children and still
clamours for more.\"

**October 22, 1885**

It was Thursday evening, a few days after the Durga Puja. Sri
Ramakrishna sat on his bed in his room on the second floor, with
Dr.Sarkar, Ishan, and other devotees. Although Dr.Sarkar was a very busy
physician, he would spend a long time-sometimes six or seven hours-in
Sri Ramakrishna\'s company. He had great love for the Master and looked
on the devotees as his own kith and kin. A lamp was burning in the room.
Moonlight illumined the outside world.

**Master praises the true householder**

Addressing Ishan, a householder devotee, the Master said: Blessed indeed
is the householder who performs his duties in the world, at the same
time cherishing love for the Lotus Feet of God. He is indeed a hero. He
is like a man who carries a heavy load of two maunds on his head and at
the same time watches a bridal procession. One cannot lead such a life
without great spiritual power. Again, such a man is like the mudfish,
which lives in the mud but is not stained by it. Further, such a
householder may be compared to a waterfowl. It is constantly diving
under water; yet, by fluttering its wings only once, it shakes off all
trace of wet.

**Advice to householders & Necessity of solitude**

\"But a man must practise some spiritual discipline in order to be able
to lead a detached life in the world. It is necessary for him to spend
some time in solitude-be it a year, six months, three months, or even
one month. In that solitude he should fix his mind on God and pray with
a longing heart for love of God. He should also say to himself: \'There
is nobody in this world who is my own. Those whom I call my own are here
only for two days. God alone is my own. He alone is my all in all. Alas,
how shall I realize Him?\'

\"One can live in the world after acquiring love of God. It is like
breaking the jack-fruit after rubbing your hands with oil; the sticky
juice of the fruit will not smear them. The world is like water and the
mind like milk. If you put milk in water it will mix with the water. But
first keep the milk in a quiet place and let it turn into curd. Then
from the curd extract butter. That butter you may keep in water; it will
not mix with the water, but will float on it.

**Example of Janaka**

\"Some members of the Brahmo Samaj said to me: \'Sir, our attitude
toward the world is that of King Janaka. Like him, we want to enjoy the
world in a detached spirit.\' I said to them: \'To live in the world in
a detached spirit is very difficult. By merely saying so you cannot be a
King Janaka. How much austerity Janaka practised! How long he remained
in one posture, with head down and feet up! You don\'t have to practise
these extreme disciplines. But you need *sādhanā*, you should live in
solitude. You may lead the life of a householder after having attained
divine knowledge and love in solitude. Milk turns into curd only when it
is not disturbed. The

curd does not set if the milk is often moved from place to place or is
too much disturbed.\'

\"On account of his detachment from the world Janaka was also known as
the \'Videha\', that is, one free from consciousness of the body. Though
living in the world, he moved about as a jivanmukta, a free soul living
in a body. But for most people freedom from body-consciousness is
something very far off. Intense spiritual discipline is necessary.

\"Janaka was a great hero. He fenced with two swords, the one of
knowledge and the other of work.

**The householder Jnāni and the monk Jnāni**

\"You may ask, \'Is there any difference between the realizations of two
jnanis, one a householder and the other a monk?\' The reply is that the
two belong to one class. Both of them are jnanis; they have the same
experience. But a householder Jnāni has reason to fear. He cannot
altogether get rid of his fear as long as he is to live in the midst of
\'woman and gold\'. If you constantly live in a room full of soot, you
are sure to soil your body, be it ever so little, no matter how clever
you may be.

\"After extracting the butter, if you keep it in a new pot, then there
is no chance of its getting spoiled. But if you keep the butter in a pot
where curd has been kept, well, then it is doubtful whether it will keep
its flavour. (Laughter.)

\"When they parch rice, a few grains jump out of the frying-pan to the
ground. These are white, like mallika flowers, without the slightest
stain on them. But the grains that remain in the pan are also good,
though not as immaculate as the fresh mallika flower. They are a little
stained. In the same way, if a monk who has renounced the world attains
divine wisdom, he appears as spotless as the white flower; but one who
stays in the frying-pan of the world after attaining Knowledge may get a
little blemish. (All laugh.)

\"Once a bhairavi came to King Janaka\'s court. At the sight of the
woman, the king bent his head and cast his eyes to the ground. At this
the bhairavi said, \'O Janaka, even now you are afraid of a woman!\'
Through Perfect Knowledge a man becomes like a child five years old; he
does not know the distinction between a man and a woman.

\"Although a Jnāni living in the world may have a little blemish, yet
this does not injure him. The moon undoubtedly has dark spots, but these
do not obstruct its light.

**Teaching others after realizing God**

\"After realizing God, some souls perform work in order to teach men.
Janaka, Nārada, and others like them, belong to this group. But one must
possess power in order to be able to teach others. The sages of old were
busy attaining knowledge for themselves. But teachers like Nārada went
about doing good to others. They were real heroes.

\"A worthless stick floating on the water sinks under the weight of a
bird; but a heavy and substantial log floating on the water can support
a cow, a man, or even an elephant. A steamboat not only crosses the
water itself but carries many human beings with it. Teachers like Nārada
may be compared to the heavy log of wood or the steamboat.

\"One man, after eating a tasty morsel, removes every trace of it by
wiping his face carefully with a towel, lest anyone should know. (All
laugh.) Another, again, having got a mango, not only enjoys it himself
but shares it with others.

**Knowledge and love of God**

\"Even after having attained Perfect Knowledge, teachers like Nārada
retained love of God in their minds for the welfare of others.\"

DOCTOR: \"Jnāna makes a man speechless. He closes his eyes and sheds
tears. Then he needs bhakti.\"

MASTER: \"Bhakti may be likened to a woman who has access to the inner
court of a house. Jnāna can go only as far as the outer rooms.\"

DOCTOR: \"All women are not allowed to enter the inner court, for
instance, prostitutes. Hence the need of Jnāna.\"

MASTER: \"A man may not know the right path, but if he has bhakti and
the desire to know God, then he attains Him through the force of sheer
bhakti. Once a sincere devotee set out on a pilgrimage to the temple of
Jagannath in Puri. He did not know the way; he went west instead of
south. He no doubt strayed from the right path, but he always eagerly
asked people the way, and they gave him the right directions, saying,
\'This is not the path; follow that one.\' At last the devotee was able
to get to Puri and worship the Deity. So you see, even if you are
ignorant, someone will tell you the way if you are earnest.\"

DOCTOR: \"But the devotee in his ignorance did lose his way.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, such a thing happens, no doubt. But a man reaches the
goal in the end.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Has God a form or is He formless?\"

MASTER: \"God has form and, again, He is formless. Once upon a time a
sannyāsi entered the temple of Jagannath . As he looked at the holy
image he debated within himself whether God had a form or was formless.
He passed his staff from left to right to feel whether it touched the
image. The staff touched nothing. He understood that there was no image
before him; he concluded that God was formless. Next he passed the staff
from right to left. It touched the image. The sannyāsi understood that
God had form. Thus he realized that God has form and, again, is
formless.

\"But it is extremely difficult to understand this. Naturally the doubt
arises in the mind: if God is formless, how then can He have form?
Further, if He has a form, why does He have so many forms?\"

DOCTOR: \"God has created all these forms in the world; therefore He
Himself has a form. Again, He has created the mind; therefore He is
formless. It is possible for God to be everything.\"

**Personal God and Impersonal Truth**

MASTER: \"These things do not become clear until one has realized God.
He assumes different forms and reveals Himself in different ways for the
sake of His devotees. A man kept a solution of dye in a tub. Many people
came to him to have their clothes dyed. He would ask a customer, \'What
colour should you like to have your cloth dyed?\' If the customer wanted
red, then the man would dip the cloth in the tub and say, \'Here is your
cloth dyed red.\' If another customer wanted his cloth dyed yellow, the
man would dip his cloth in the same tub and say, \'Here is your cloth
dyed yellow.\' If a customer wanted his cloth dyed blue, the man would
dip it in the same tub and say, \'Here is your cloth dyed blue.\' Thus
he would dye the clothes of his customers different colours, dipping
them all in the same solution. One of the customers watched all this
with amazement. The man asked him, \'Well? What colour do you want for
your cloth?\' The customer said, \'Brother, dye my cloth the colour of
the dye in your tub.\' (Laughter.)

**Illustration of the chameleon**

\"Once a man went into a wood and saw a beautiful creature on a tree.
Later he told a friend about it and said, \'Brother, on a certain tree
in the wood I saw a red-coloured creature.\' The friend answered: \'I
have seen it too. Why do you call it red? It is green.\' A third man
said: \'Oh, no, no! Why do you call it green? It is yellow.\' Then other
persons began to describe the animal variously as violet, blue, or
black. Soon they were quarrelling about the colour. At last they went to
the tree and found a man sitting under it. In answer to their questions
he said: \'I live under this tree and know the creature very well. What
each of you has said about it is true. Sometimes it is red, sometimes
green, sometimes yellow, sometimes blue, and so forth and so on. Again,
sometimes I see that it has no colour whatsoever.\'

\"Only he who constantly thinks of God can know His real nature. He
alone knows that God reveals Himself in different forms and different
ways that He has attributes and, again, has none. Only the man who lives
under the tree knows that the chameleon can assume various colours and
that sometimes it remains colourless. Others, not knowing the whole
truth, quarrel among themselves and suffer.

**Illustration of ice and water**

\"Yes, God has form and, again, He has none. Do you know how it is?
Brahman, Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute, is like a shoreless ocean.
In the ocean visible blocks of ice are formed here and there by intense
cold. Similarly, under the cooling influence, so to speak, of the bhakti
of Its worshippers, the Infinite transforms Itself into the finite and
appears before the worshipper as God with form. That is to say, God
reveals Himself to His bhaktas as an embodied Person. Again, as, on the
rising of the sun, the ice in the ocean melts away, so, on the awakening
of Jnāna, the embodied God melts back into the infinite and formless
Brahman.\"

DOCTOR: \"Yes. When the sun is up, the ice melts; and what is more, the
heat of the sun turns the water into invisible vapour.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, that is true. As a result of the discrimination that
Brahman alone is real and the world illusory, the aspirant goes into
samādhi. Then, for him, the forms or attributes of God disappear
altogether. Then he does not feel God to be a Person. Then he cannot
describe in words what God is. And who will describe it? He who is to
describe does not exist at all; he no longer finds his \'I\'. To such a
person Brahman is attributeless. In that state God is experienced only
as Consciousness, by man\'s inmost consciousness. He cannot be
comprehended by the mind and intelligence.

\"Therefore people compare bhakti, love of God, to the cooling light of
the moon, and janana, knowledge, to the burning rays of the sun. I have
heard that there are oceans in the extreme north and extreme south where
the air is so cold that it freezes the water into huge blocks of ice
here and there. Ships cannot move there; They are stopped by the ice.\"

DOCTOR: \"Then in the path of bhakti the aspirant meets with
obstacles.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, that is true. But it does not cause the devotee any harm.
After all, it is the water of the Ocean of Brahman,
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute, that is frozen into ice. It will not
injure you if you continue to reason, saying, for instance, that Brahman
alone is real and the world illusory. This reasoning will awaken in you
Jnāna, which, like the sun, will melt the ice of divine forms back into
the infinite Ocean of Brahman, Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute.

**\"I-consciousness\"**

\"In the samādhi that comes at the end of reasoning and discrimination,
no such thing as \'I\' exists. But it is extremely difficult to attain
it; \'I-consciousness\' lingers so persistently. That is why a man is
born again and again in this world.

**Parable of the cow**

\"The cow suffers so much because she says, \'Hamba! Hamba!\', that is,
\'I! I!\' She is yoked to the plough all day long, rain or shine. Or she
is slaughtered by the butcher. But even that doesn\'t put an end to her
misery. The cobbler tans her hide to make shoes from it. At last the
carder makes a string for his bow from her entrails and uses the string
in carding; then it says, \'Tuhu! Tuhu!\', that is, \'Thou! Thou!\' Only
then does the cow\'s suffering come to an end.

\"Likewise, only when a man says: \'Not I! Not I! I am nobody. O Lord,
Thou art the Doer and I am Thy servant; Thou art the Master\', is he
freed from all sufferings; only then is he liberated.\"

DOCTOR: \"But one must fall into the hands of the carder.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER: \"If this ego cannot be got rid of, then let the rascal remain
as the servant of God. (All laugh.)

**Harmless and injurious ego & \"Ripe ego\" and \"unripe ego\"**

\"A man may keep this ego even after attaining samādhi. Such a man feels
either that he is a servant of God or that he is a lover of God.
Sankaracharya retained the \'ego of Knowledge\' to teach men spiritual
life. The \'servant-ego\', the \'Knowledge ego\', or the \'devotee ego\'
may be called the \'ripe ego\'. It is different from the \'unripe ego\',
which makes one feel: \'I am the doer. I am the son of a wealthy man. I
am learned. I am rich. How dare anyone slight me?\' A man with and
\'unripe ego\' cherishes such ideas. Suppose a thief has entered such a
man\'s house and stolen some of his belongings. If the thief is caught,
all the articles will be snatched away from him. Then he will be beaten.
At last he will be handed over to the police. The owner of the stolen
goods will say: \'what! This rogue doesn\'t know whose house he has
entered!\'

**Childlike nature of perfect souls**

\"After realizing God, a man becomes like a child five years old. The
ego of such a man may be called the \'ego of a child\', the \'ripe
ego\'. The child is not under the control of any of the *Gunās*. He is
beyond the three *Gunās*. He is not under the control of any of the
*Gunās*-sattva, rajas, or tamas. Just watch a child and you will find
that he is not under the influence of tamas. One moment he quarrels with
his chum or even fights with him, and the next moment he hugs him, shows
him much affection, and plays with him again. He is not even under the
control of rajas. Now he builds his play house and makes all kinds of
plans to make it beautiful, and the next moment he leaves everything
behind and runs to his mother. Again, you see him wearing a beautiful
piece of cloth worth five rupees. After a few moments the cloth lies on
the ground; he forgets all about it. Or he may carry it under his arm.
If you say to the child: \'That\'s a beautiful piece of cloth. Whose is
it?\', he answers: \'Why, it is mine. My daddy gave it to me.\' You may
say, \'My darling, won\'t you give it to me?\' and he will reply: \'Oh
no, it is mine. My daddy gave it to me. I won\'t give it to you.\' Some
minutes later you may coax him with a toy or a music-box worth a penny,
and he will give you the cloth. Again, a child five years old is not
attached even to sattva. You may find him today very fond of his
playmates in the neighbourhood; he doesn\'t feel happy for a moment
without seeing them; but tomorrow, when he goes to another place with
his parents, he finds new playmates; all his love is now directed to his
new friends, and he almost forgets about his old ones. Further, a child
has no pride of caste or family. If his mother says to him about a
certain person, \'This man is your elder brother\', he believes this to
be one hundred per cent true. One of the two may have been born in a
brahmin family and the other may belong to a low caste, say that of the
blacksmiths, but they will take their meal from the same plate. A child
is beyond all ideas of purity and impurity. He is not bound by social
conventions. He doesn\'t hesitate to come out naked before others.

**\"Ego of old age\"**

\"Then there is an \'ego of old age\'. (Dr. Sarkar laughs.) An old man
has many shackles: caste, pride, shame, hatred, and fear. Furthermore,
he is bound by the ideas of worldly cleverness, calculating
intelligence, and deceit. If he is angry with anybody, he cannot shake
it off easily; perhaps he keeps the feeling as long as he lives. Again,
there is the \'ego of scholarship\' and the \'ego of wealth\'. The \'ego
of old age\' is an \'unripe ego\'.

**Characteristics of tamas**

(To the doctor) \"There are a few men who cannot attain knowledge of
God: men proud of their scholarship, proud of their education, or proud
of their wealth. If you speak to such people about a holy man and ask
them to visit him, they make all kinds of excuses and will not go. But
in their heart of hearts they think: \'Why, we are big people ourselves.
Must we go and visit someone else?\'

\"A characteristic of tamas is pride. Pride and delusion come from
tamas.

\"It is said in the Purana that Ravana had an excess of rajas,
Kumbhakarna of tamas, and Bibhishana of sattva. That is why Bibhishana
was able to receive the grace of Rāma. Another characteristic of tamas
is anger. Through anger one loses one\'s wits and cannot distinguish
between right and wrong. In a fit of anger

Hanuman set fire to Lanka, without thinking for a moment that the fire
might also burn down the hut where Sita lived.

\"Still another feature of tamas is lust.

**Turn your passions to God**

Girindra Ghosh of PathuriaGhata once remarked, \'Since you cannot get
rid of your passions-your lust, your anger, and so on-give them a new
direction. Instead of desiring worldly pleasures, desire God. Have
intercourse with Brahman. If you cannot get rid of anger, then change
its direction. Assume the tamasic attitude of bhakti, and say: \'What? I
have repeated the hallowed name of Durga, and shall I not be liberated?
How can I be a sinner any more? How can I be bound any more?\' If you
cannot get rid of temptation, direct it toward God. Be infatuated with
God\'s beauty. If you cannot get rid of pride, then be proud to say that
you are the servant of God, you are the child of God. Thus turn the six
passions toward God.\"

DOCTOR: \"It is very hard to control the sense-organs. They are like
restive horses, whose eyes must be covered with blinkers. In the case of
some horses it is necessary to prevent them from seeing at all.\"

MASTER: \"A man need not fear anything if but once he receives the grace
of God, if but once he obtains the vision of God, if but once he attains
Self-Knowledge. Then the six passions cannot do him any harm.

\"Eternally perfect souls like Nārada and Prahlada did not have to take
the trouble to put blinkers on their eyes. The child who holds his
father\'s hand, while walking along the narrow balk in the paddy-field,
may loosen his hold in a moment of carelessness and slip into the ditch.
But it is quite different if the father holds the child\'s hand. Then
the child never falls into the ditch.\"

DOCTOR: \"But it is not proper for a father to hold his child by the
hand.\"

MASTER: \"It is not quite like that. Great sages have childlike natures.
Before God they are always like children. They have no pride. Their
strength is the strength of God, the strength of their Father. They have
nothing to call their own. They are firmly convinced of that.\"

DOCTOR: \"Can you make a horse move forward without first covering his
eyes with blinkers? Can one realize God without first controlling the
passions?\"

**Paths of knowledge and devotion**

MASTER: \"What you say is according to the path of discrimination. It is
known as Jnāna yoga. Through that path, too, one attains God. The jnanis
say that an aspirant must first of all purify his heart. First he needs
spiritual exercises; then he will attain Knowledge.

\"But God can also be realized through the path of devotion. Once the
devotee develops love for the Lotus Feet of God and enjoys the singing
of His name and attributes, he does not have to make a special effort to
restrain his senses. For such a devotee the sense-organs come under
control of themselves.

\"Suppose a man has just lost his son and is mourning his death. Can he
be in a mood to quarrel with others that very day, or enjoy a feast in
the house of a friend? Can he, that very day, show his pride before
others or enjoy sense pleasures?

\"If the moth discovers light, can it remain in darkness any longer?\"

DOCTOR (with a smile): \"Of course it cannot. It would rather fly into
the flame and perish.\"

MASTER: \"Oh no, that\'s not so. A lover of God does not burn himself to
death, like a moth. The light to which he rushes is like the light of a
gem. That light is brilliant, no doubt, but it is also cooling and
soothing. That light does not scorch his body; it gives him joy and
peace.

**Difficulty of path of knowledge**

\"One realizes God by following the path of discrimination and
knowledge. But this is an extremely difficult path. It is easy enough to
say such things as, \'I am not the body, mind, or intellect; I am beyond
grief, disease, and sorrow; I am the embodiment of
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute; I am beyond pain and pleasure; I am
not under the control of the sense-organs\', but it is very hard to
assimilate these ideas and practise them. Suppose I see, my hand cut by
a thorn and blood gushing out; then it is not right for me to say:
\'Why, my hand is not cut by the thorn! I am all right.\' In order to be
able to say that, I must first of all burn the thorn itself in the fire
of Knowledge.

\"Many people think they cannot have knowledge or understanding of God
without reading books. But hearing is better than reading, and seeing is
better than hearing. Hearing about Benares is different from reading
about it; but seeing Benares is different from either hearing or
reading.

\"Those actually engaged in a game of chess do not always judge the
moves on the board correctly. The onlookers often judge the moves better
than the players. Worldly people often think themselves very
intelligent, but they are attached to the things of the world. They are
the actual players and cannot understand their own moves correctly. But
holy men, who have renounced everything, are unattached to the world;
they are really more intelligent than worldly people. Since they do not
take any part in worldly life, their position is that of onlookers, and
so they see things more clearly.\"

DOCTOR (to the devotees): \"If he \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\] had
studied books he could not have acquired so much knowledge. Faraday
communed with nature; that is why he was able to discover many
scientific truths. He could not have known so much from the mere study
of books. Mathematical formulas only throw the brain into confusion and
bar the path of original inquiry.\"

MASTER: \"There was a time when I lay on the ground in the Panchavati
and prayed to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother, reveal to me what the
karmis have realized through their ritualistic worship, what the yogis
have realized through yoga, and what the jnanis have realized through
discrimination.\' How much I communed with the Divine Mother! How can I
describe it all?

\"Ah, what a state I passed through! Sleep left me completely.\"

The Master sang:

> *My sleep is broken; how can I slumber any more?*
>
> *For now I am wide awake in the sleeplessness of yoga.*
>
> *O Divine Mother, made one with Thee in yoga-sleep at last,*
>
> *My slumber I have lulled asleep for evermore.*
>
> *A man has come to me from a country where there is no night;*
>
> *Rituals and devotions have all grown profitless for me.*

He continued: \"I have not read books. But people show me respect
because I chant the name of the Divine Mother. Sambhu Mallick said about
me, \'Here is a great hero without a sword or shield!\'\" (Laughter.)

The conversation turned to the performance of a drama by Girish Ghosh
called The Life of Buddha. The doctor had seen the play and been much
pleased with it.

DOCTOR (to Girish): \"You are a very bad man. Must I go to the theatre
every day?\"

MASTER (to M.): \"What does he say? I don\'t quite understand.\"

M: \"The doctor liked the play very much.\"

**Discussion about Divine Incarnation**

MASTER (to Ishan): \"Why don\'t you say something? (Pointing to the
doctor) He does not believe that god can incarnate Himself in a human
form.\"

ISHAN: \"What shall I say, sir? I don\'t like to argue any more.\"

MASTER (sharply): \"Why? Won\'t you say the right thing?\"

ISHAN (to the doctor): \"Our faith is shallow on account of our pride.
It is said in the Ramayana that a crow named Bhushandi did not at first
accept Rāma as an Incarnation of God. Once it incurred Rāma\'s
displeasure. It travelled through the different worlds-the lunar, solar,
and so forth-and through Mount Kailas, to escape Rāma\'s wrath. But it
found that it could not escape. Then it surrendered itself to Him and
took refuge at His feet. Rāma took the crow in His hand and swallowed
it. Thereupon the crow found that it was seated in it\'s own nest in a
tree. After its pride had thus been crushed, the bird came to realize
that though Rāma looked like any other man, yet He contained in His
stomach the entire universe-sky, moon, sun, stars, oceans, rivers, men,
animals, and trees.\"

MASTER (to the doctor): \"It is very difficult to understand that God
can be a finite human being and at the same time the all-pervading Soul
of the universe. The Absolute and the Relative are His two aspects. How
can we say emphatically with our small intelligence that God cannot
assume a human form? Can we ever understand all these ideas with our
little intellect? Can a one-seer pot hold four seers of milk?

\"Therefore one should trust in the words of holy men and great souls,
those who have realized God. They constantly think of God, as a lawyer
of his lawsuits. Do you believe the story of the crow Bhushandi?\"

DOCTOR: \"I accept as much as I want to. All difficulties come to an end
if only God reveals His true nature to the seeker. Then there can be no
confusion. How can I accept Rāma as an Incarnation of God? Take the
example of His killing Vali, the monkey chieftain. He hid Himself behind
a tree, like a thief, and murdered Vali. This is how a man acts, and not
God.\"

GIRISH: \"But, sir, such an action is possible only for God.\"

DOCTOR: \"Then take the example of His sending Sita into exile.\"

GIRISH: \"This too, sir, is possible only for God, not for man.\"

ISHAN (to the doctor): \"Why don\'t you believe in the Incarnation of
God? Just now you said that God has form since He has created all these
forms, and that God is formless since He has created the mind, which is
without form. A moment ago you said that everything is possible for
God.\"

MASTER (laughing): \"It is not mentioned in his \'science\' that God can
take human form; so how can he believe it? (All laugh.)

\"Listen to a story. A man said to his friend, \'I have just seen a
house fall down with a terrific crash.\' Now, the friend to whom he told
this had received an English education. He said: \'Just a minute. Let me
look it up in the newspaper.\' He read the paper but could not find the
news of a house falling down with a crash. Thereupon he said to his
friend: \'Well, I don\'t believe you. It isn\'t in the paper; so it is
all false.\' \" (All laugh.)

GIRISH (to the doctor): \"You must admit that Krishna is God. I will not
let you look on Him as a mere man. You must admit that He is either God
or a demon.\"

MASTER: \"Unless a man is guileless, he cannot so easily have faith in
God. God is far, far away from the mind steeped in worldliness. Worldly
intelligence creates many doubts and many forms of pride-pride of
learning, wealth, and the rest. (Pointing to the doctor) But he is
guileless.

\"How guileless Keshab Sen was! One day he visited the Kāli temple at
Dakshineswar. At about four in the

afternoon he went around to the guesthouse, where the poor are fed, and
asked when the beggars would be fed. He didn\'t know that it was too
late in the day for the feeding of the poor. As a man\'s faith
increases, so does his knowledge of God. The cow that discriminates too
much about food gives milk in dribblets. But the cow that gulps down
everything-herbs, leaves, grass, husks, straw-gives milk in torrents.
(All laugh.)

**Childlike faith**

\"God cannot be realized without childlike faith. The mother says to her
child, pointing to a boy, \'He is your elder brother.\' And the child at
once believes that the boy is one hundred per cent his brother. Again,
the mother says that a bogy man lives in a certain room, and the child
believes one hundred per cent that the bogy man lives in the room. God
bestows His grace on the devotee who has this faith of a child. God
cannot be realized by the mind steeped in worldliness.\"

DOCTOR (to the devotees): \"It is not right, however, to make the cow
yield milk by feeding her all sorts of things. One of my cows was fed
that way. I drank its milk and the result was that I became seriously
ill. At first I was at a loss to know the cause. After much inquiry I
found out that the cow had been given the wrong things to eat, I was in
a great fix. I had to go to Lucknow for a change to get rid of the
illness. I spent twelve thousand rupees. (Roars of laughter.)

\"It is very difficult always to find out the precise relationship
between cause and effect. A child of seven months, in a wealthy family,
had an attack of whooping-cough. I was called in for consultation. Even
after much effort I could not find out the cause of the illness. At last
I learnt that the child had been given the milk of an ass that had been
drenched in the rain.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER (to the devotees): \"How strange! It is like saying that a man
has an acid stomach because he passed, in his coach, under a tamarind
tree.\" (All laugh.)

DOCTOR (with a smile): \"Let me tell you another. The captain of a ship
had a bad headache. After consultation, the doctors on board had a
blister applied to the side of the boat.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER (to the doctor): \"For the seekers of God the constant company of
holy men is necessary. The disease of worldly people has become chronic,
as it were. They should carry out the instruction of holy men. What will
they gain by merely listening to their advice? They must not only take
the prescribed medicine, but also follow a strict diet. Diet is
important.\"

DOCTOR: \"Yes, it is the diet, more than anything else, that causes the
cure.

MASTER: \"There are three classes of physicians: superior, mediocre, and
inferior. The inferior physician feels the patient\'s pulse, merely asks
him to take medicine, and then goes away. He doesn\'t bother to find out
whether the patient has followed his directions. The mediocre physician
gently tries to persuade the patient to take the medicine. He says:
\'Look here. How can you get well without medicine? Take the medicine,
my dear. I am preparing It with my own hands.\' But the superior
physician follows a different method. If he finds the patient stubbornly
refusing to swallow the medicine, he presses the patient\'s chest with
his knee and forces the medicine down his throat.\"

DOCTOR: \"There is a form of treatment that does not require the
physician to press the patient\'s chest with his knee. For instance,
homeopathy.\"

MASTER: \"There is no fear if a good physician presses the patient\'s
chest with his knee.

**Three classes of teachers**

\"Like the physicians, there are three classes of religious teachers.
The inferior teacher is content with merely giving spiritual
instruction; he doesn\'t bother about the student after that. The
mediocre teacher explains the teaching again and again for the good of
the student, that he may assimilate it; he persuades the student through
love and kindness to follow it. But the superior teacher uses force, if
necessary, on the stubborn

student.

(To the doctor) \"The renunciation of \'woman and gold\' is meant for
the sannyāsi. He must not look even at the picture of a woman. Do you
know what a woman is to a man? She is like spiced pickle. The very
thought of pickle brings water to the tongue; it doesn\'t have to be
brought near the tongue.

**Advice to householders**

\"But this renunciation is not meant for householders like you. It is
meant only for sannyāsis. You may live among women, as far as possible
in a spirit of detachment. Now and then you must retire into solitude
and think of God. Women must not be allowed there. You can lead an
unattached life to a great extent if you have faith in God and love for
Him. After the birth of one or two children a married couple should live
as brother and sister. They should then constantly pray to God that
their minds may not run after sense pleasures any more and that they may
not have any more children.\"

GIRISH (to the doctor, with a smile): \"You have already spent three or
four hours here. What about your patients?\"

DOCTOR: \"Well, my practice and patients! I shall lose everything on
account of your paramahamsa!\" (All laugh.)

MASTER: \"There is a river called the \'Karmanasa\'. It is very
dangerous to dive into that river. If a man plunges into its waters he
cannot perform any more action. It puts an end to his duties.\" (All
laugh.) .

DOCTOR (to Girish, M., and the other devotees): \"My friends, consider
me as one of you. I am not saying this as a physician. But if you think
of me as your own, then I am yours.\"

MASTER (to the doctor): \"There is such a thing as love for love\'s
sake. It is very good if one can grow such love. Prahlada loved God for
the sake of love. A devotee like Prahlada says: \'O God, I do not want
wealth, fame, creature comforts, or any such thing. Please grant me the
boon that I may have genuine love for Thy Lotus Feet.\"

DOCTOR: \"You are right, sir. I have seen people bowing down before the
image of Kāli They seek worldly objects from the Goddess, such as a job,
the healing of disease, and so forth.

(To the Master) \"The illness you are suffering from does not permit the
patient to talk with people. But my case is an exception. You may talk
with me when I am here.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER; \"Please cure my illness. I cannot chant the name and glories of
God.\"

DOCTOR; \"Meditation is enough.\"

MASTER: \"What do you mean? Why should I lead a monotonous life? I enjoy
my fish in a variety of dishes: curried fish, fried fish, pickled fish,
and so forth! Sometimes I worship God with rituals, sometimes I repeat
His name, sometimes I meditate on Him, sometimes I sing His name and
glories, sometime I dance in His name.\"

DOCTOR: \"Neither am I monotonous.\"

MASTER: \"Your son Amrita does not believe in the Incarnation of God.
What is the harm in that? One realizes God even if one believes Him to
be formless. One also realizes God if one believes that God has form.

**Faith and self-surrender**

Two things are necessary for the realization of God; faith and
self-surrender. Man is ignorant by nature. Errors are natural to him.
Can a one-seer pot hold four seers of milk? Whatever path you may
follow, you must pray to God with a restless heart. He is the Ruler of
the soul within. He will surely listen to your prayer if it is

sincere. Whether you follow the ideal of the Personal God or that of the
Impersonal Truth, you will realize God alone, provided you are restless
for Him. A cake with icing tastes sweet whether you eat it straight or
sidewise.

\"Your son Amrita is a nice boy.\"

DOCTOR: \"He is your disciple.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"There is not a fellow under the sun who is my
disciple. On the contrary, I am everybody\'s disciple. All are the
children of God. All are His servants. I too am a child of God. I too am
His servant. \'Uncle Moon\' is every child\'s uncle!\"

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 46**

THE MASTER AND DR. SARKAR

> Friday, October 23, 1885

IT WAS THE DAY of the full moon following the Durga Puja, the worship of
the Divine Mother. At ten o\'clock

in the morning Sri Ramakrishna was talking to M., who was helping him
with his socks.

MASTER (smiling): \"Why can\'t I cut my woolen scarf into two pieces and
wrap them around my legs like socks? They will be nice and warm.\"

M. Smiled. The previous evening Sri Ramakrishna had had a long
conversation with Dr. Sarkar. Referring to it, the Master said
laughingly, \"I told him the story of the calf, and about egotism being
the cause of all suffering.\"

The younger Naren reminded Sri Ramakrishna that he, the Master, had told
the doctor about people\'s suffering from the threefold misery of the
world and still bragging of their well-being. The disciple said, \"That
was very nice thing you said yesterday about the thorn, and also about
burning it in the fire of Knowledge.\"

**Master\'s visions**

MASTER: \"I had direct visions of those things. One day, I was passing
back of the Kuthi when my whole body burst into flames, as it were, like
the fire in a homa. Padmalochan once said to me, \'I shall convene an
assembly of pundits and proclaim your spiritual experiences before
all.\' But he died shortly after.\"

**The doctor and M.**

At eleven o\'clock M. went to Dr. Sarkar\'s house to report Sri
Ramakrishna\'s condition. The doctor showed great eagerness to hear
about him.

DOCTOR (laughing): \"How well I told him yesterday that in order to be
able to say \'Tuhu! Tuhu!\', \'Thou! Thou!\', one must fall into the
hands of an expert carder!\"

1.  \"It is true, sir. One cannot get rid of egotism without the help of
    a capable teacher. How well he spoke last night of bhakti! Bhakti,
    like a woman, can go into the inner court.\"

DOCTOR: \"Yes, that is very nice. But still one cannot give up Jnāna.\"

1.  \"But he does not say that. He accepts both knowledge and love, the
    Impersonal Truth and the Personal God. He says that through the
    cooling influence of bhakti a part of the Reality takes the solid
    form of the Personal God; and with the rise of the sun of Jnāna the
    ice of form melts again into the formless water of the Absolute. In
    other words, you realize God with form through bhaktiyoga, and the
    formless Absolute through Jnāna yoga.

\"You must have noticed that he sees God so near him that he always
converses with Him. When suffering from illness, he says to God, like a
small child, \'Oh, Mother, it is hurting me!\'

**Influence of holy company**

\"How wonderful his power of observation is! He saw a fossil in the
museum. At once he gave it as an example of the effect of companionship
with holy persons. Just as an object is turned into stone by remaining
near stone, so does a man become holy by living with a holy man.\"

DOCTOR: \"Yesterday Ishan Babu talked of the Incarnation of God. What is
that? To call man God!\"

M: \"Everyone has his own faith. What is the use of interfering with
it?\"

DOCTOR: \"Yes, what is the use?\"

1.  \"How the Master made us laugh when he told us about a certain man
    who refused to believe that a house had collapsed, because it was
    not published in the news paper!\"

Doctor Sarkar remained silent. Sri Ramakrishna had said to him, \"Your
\'science\' does not speak of God\'s Incarnation; therefore you say that
God cannot incarnate Himself as man.\"

It was midday. Doctor Sarkar took M. with him in his carriage. He was
going to visit Sri Ramakrishna after seeing his other patients.

A few days before, at Girish\'s invitation, Doctor Sarkar had seen his
play about Buddha\'s life. He said to M.: \"It would have been better to
speak of Buddha as the Incarnation of Compassion. Why did he speak of
him as an Incarnation of Vishnu?\"

The doctor set M. down at the corner of Cornwallis Square.

It was three o\'clock in the afternoon. One or two devotees were seated
near Sri Ramakrishna. He became impatient, like a child. Repeatedly he
asked the devotees, \"When is the doctor coming?\" \"What time is it
now?\" Doctor Sarkar was expected in the evening.

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna was overwhelmed with a strange mood. He placed
his pillow on his lap. Filled with maternal love, he began to caress it
and hold it to his breast as if it were his child. He was in an ecstatic
mood. His face was lighted with a childlike smile. He put on his cloth
in a strange manner. The devotees looked at him in amazement.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna was in his normal mood. It was time for
his meal. He ate a little boiled farina.

He was talking to M. about his mystic experiences.

**Master\'s mystic experiences**

MASTER (to M., aside): \"Do you know what I saw just now in my ecstatic
state? There was a meadow covering an area of seven or eight miles,
through which lay the road to Sihore. I was alone in that meadow. I saw
a sixteen year-old paramahamsa boy exactly like the one I had seen in
the Panchavati.

\"A mist of bliss lay all around. Out of it emerged a boy thirteen or
fourteen years old. I saw his face. He looked like Purna. Both of us
were naked. Then we began to run around joyfully in the meadow. Purna
felt thirsty. He drank some water from a tumbler and offered me what was
left. I said to him, \'Brother, I cannot take your leavings.\' Thereupon
he laughed, washed the glass, and brought me fresh water.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was again in samādhi. He regained consciousness and
began to talk to M.

MASTER: \"My mind is undergoing a change. I cannot take prasad any more.
The Real and the Appearance are becoming one to me. Do you know what I
saw just now? A divine form-a vision of the Divine Mother. She had a
child in Her womb. She gave birth to it and the next instant began to
swallow it; and as much of it as went into Her mouth became void. It was
revealed to me that everything is void. The Divine Mother said to me, as
it were: \'Come confusion! Come delusion! Come!\'

This reminded M. of Sri Ramakrishna\'s saying that the magician alone is
real and all else unreal.

MASTER: \"Well, how is it that the other time I tried to attract Purna
but failed? This weakens my faith a little.\"

1.  \"But to attract a person is to work a miracle.\" MASTER: \"Yes, a
    downright miracle.\"

**About miracles**

1.  \"You remember, one day we were returning to Dakshineswar in a
    carriage from Adhar\'s house, when a bottle broke. One of us said to
    you: \'Does this mean that any harm will befall us? What do you
    think?\' You said: \'what do I care? Why should I bother about it?
    That would be miracle working.\'\"

MASTER: \"Yes, people lay ailing children down on the ground where men
chant the name of God, in order that they may be cured; or people cure
disease through occult powers. All this is miracle-working. Only those
whose spiritual experience is extremely shallow call on God for the
healing of disease.\"

It was evening. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on his bed, thinking of the
Divine Mother and repeating Her hallowed name. The devotees sat near him
in silence. Lātu, Śaśi, Sarat, the younger Naren, Paltu, Bhupati,
Girish, and others were present. Ramtaran of the Star Theatre had come
with Girish to entertain Sri Ramakrishna with his singing. A few minutes
later Dr. Sarkar arrived.

DOCTOR (to the Master): \"I was much worried about you last night at
three o\'clock. It was raining. I said to myself, \'Who knows whether or
not the doors and windows of his room are shut?\' \"

\"Really?\" said Sri Ramakrishna. He was much pleased at the doctor\'s
love and thoughtfulness for him.

**Soul is different from body**

MASTER: \"As long as there is the body, one should take care of it. But
I find that the body is quite separate from the Self. When a man rids
himself entirely of his love for \'woman and gold\', then he clearly
perceives that the body is one thing and the Self another. When the milk
inside the coconut is all dried up, then the kernel becomes separated
from the shell; you feel the kernel rattling inside when you shake the
coconut. Or it is just like a sword and its sheath. The sword is one
thing and the sheath is another.

\"Therefore I cannot speak much to the Divine Mother about the illness
of the body.\"

GIRISH (to the devotees): \"Pundit Shashadhar said to him \[meaning the
Master\]: \'Please bring your mind to bear on the body during samādhi.
That will cure your illness.\' And he, the Master, saw in a vision that
the body was nothing but a loose mass of flesh and bones.\"

MASTER: \"Once, a long time ago, I was very ill. I was sitting in the
Kāli temple. I felt like praying to the Divine Mother to cure my
illness, but couldn\'t do so directly in my own name. I said to Her,
\'Mother, Hriday asks me to tell You about my illness.\' I could not
proceed any farther. At once there flashed into my mind the Museum of
the Asiatic Society, and a human skeleton strung together with wire. I
said to Her, \'Please tighten the wire of my body like that, so that I
may go about singing Your name and glories.\' It is impossible for me to
ask for occult powers.

\"At first Hriday asked me-I was then under his control-to pray to the
Mother for powers. I went to the temple. In a vision I saw a widow
thirty or thirty-five years old, covered with filth. It was revealed to
me that occult powers are like that filth. I became angry with Hriday
because he had asked me to pray for powers.\"

Ramtaran began to sing:

> *Behold my vina, my dearly beloved,*
>
> *My lute of sweetest tone;*
>
> *If tenderly you play on it,*
>
> *The strings will waken, at your touch,*
>
> *To rarest melodies.*
>
> *Tune it neither low nor high,*
>
> *And from it in a hundred streams*
>
> *The sweetest sound will flow;*
>
> *But over-slack the strings are mute,*
>
> *And over-stretched they snap in twain.*

DOCTOR (to Girish): \"Is it an original song?\"

GIRISH: \"No, it is an adaptation from Edwin Arnold.\"

Ramtaran sang from the play, The Life of Buddha :

> *We moan for rest, alas! but rest can never find;*
>
> *We know not whence we come, nor where we float away.*
>
> *Time and again we tread this round of smiles and tears;*
>
> *In vain we pine to know whither our pathway leads,*
>
> *And why we play this empty play.*
>
> *We sleep, although awake, as if by a spell bewitched;*
>
> *Will darkness never break into the light of dawn?*
>
> *As restless as the wind, life moves unceasingly:*
>
> *We know not who we are, nor whence it is we come;*
>
> *We know not why we come, nor where it is we drift;*
>
> *Sharp woes dart forth on every side.*
>
> *How many drift about, now gay, now drowned in tears!*
>
> *One moment they exist; the next they are no more.*
>
> *We know not why we come, nor what our deeds have been,*
>
> *Nor, in our bygone lives, how well we played our parts;*
>
> *Like water in a stream, we cannot stay at rest;*
>
> *Onward we flow for evermore.*
>
> *Burst Thou our slumber\'s bars, O Thou that art awake!*
>
> *How long must we remain enmeshed in fruitless dreams?*
>
> *Are you indeed awake? Then do not longer sleep!*
>
> *Thick on you lies the gloom fraught with a million woes.*
>
> *Raise, dreamer, from your dream, and slumber not again!*
>
> *Shine forth, O Shining One, and with Thy shafts of light*
>
> *Slay Thou the blinding dark! Our only Saviour Thou!*
>
> *We seek deliverance at Thy feet.*

As Sri Ramakrishna listened to the song, he went into samādhi.

Ramtaran sang again:

> *Blow, storm! Rage and roar! . . .*

When the song was over, Sri Ramakrishna said to the singer: \"What is
this? Why this decoction of bitter neem-leaves after the rice pudding?
The moment you sang, *Shine forth, O Shining One, and with Thy shafts of
light; Slay Thou the blinding dark!,* I had a vision of the Sun. As He
arose, the darkness vanished, and all men

took refuge at His feet.\"

Ramtaran sang again:

> *O Mother, Saviour of the helpless, Thou the Slayer of sin!*
>
> *In Thee do the three Gunās dwell-sattva, rajas, and tamas.*
>
> *Thou dost create the world: Thou dost sustain it and destroy it;*
>
> *Binding Thyself with attributes, Thou yet transcendest them;*
>
> *For Thou, O Mother, art the All.*
>
> *Kāli Thou art, and Tara, and Thou the Ultimate Prakriti;*
>
> *Thou art the Fish, the Turtle, the Boar, and all other Avatars*
>
> *Earth, water, air, and fire art Thou, and Thou the sky,*
>
> *O Mother of the Absolute!*
>
> *The Samkhya, Patanjala, Mimamsaka, and Nyaya*
>
> *For ever seek to fathom Thee and know Thine inmost nature;*
>
> *Vedānta and Vaiseshika are searching after Thee;*
>
> *But none of them has found Thee out.*
>
> *Though free of limitations, beginningless and without end,*
>
> *Yet for Thy loving bhaktas\' sake Thou wearest varying forms.*
>
> *The terrors of this world Thou dost remove, and Thou dost dwell*
>
> *Alike in present, past, and future.*
>
> *Thou dost appear with form, to him who loves Thee as a Person;*
>
> *Thou art the Absolute, to him who worships formless Truth.*
>
> *Some there are who speak alone of the resplendent Brahman;*
>
> *Even this, O Blissful Mother, is nothing else but Thee!*
>
> *Each man, according to his measure, makes his image of the Truth,*
>
> *Calling it the Highest Brahman.*
>
> *Beyond this does Turiya shine, the Indescribable:*
>
> *O Mother of all things, who dost pervade the universe,*
>
> *Everyone of these art Thou!*

Then he sang:

> *Dear friend, my religion and piety have come to an end:*
>
> *No more can I worship Mother Syama; my mind defies control.*
>
> *Oh, shame upon me! Bitter shame!*
>
> *I try to meditate on the Mother with sword in hand,*
>
> *Wearing Her garland of human heads;*
>
> *But it is always the Dark One, wearing His garland of wild wood -
> flowers*
>
> *And holding the flute to His tempting lips,*
>
> *That shines before my eyes.*
>
> *I think of the Mother with Her three eyes, but alas! I see*
>
> *Him alone with the arching eyes, and I forget all else!*
>
> *Oh, shame upon me! Bitter shame!*
>
> *I try to offer fragrant flowers at the Mother\'s feet,*
>
> *But the ravishing thought of His graceful form unsettles my helpless
> mind,*
>
> *And all my meditations meant for the Naked One are drawn away*
>
> *By the sight of His yellow scarf.*

Sri Ramakrishna was in an ecstatic mood, as he listened to the song. The
musician sang again:

> *O Mother, who has offered these red hibiscus flowers at Thy feet?*
>
> *I beg of Thee, O Mother, place one or two upon my head.*
>
> *Then I shall cry aloud to Thee, \"Oh, Mother! Mother!\"*
>
> *And I shall dance around Thee and clap my hands for joy,*
>
> *And Thou wilt look at me and laugh, and tie the flowers in my hair.*

The singing was over. Many of the devotees were in a rapturous mood.
There was a deep silence in the room.

**Guilelessness of the young devotees**

The younger Naren was absorbed in meditation. He sat like a stump.
Pointing him out to the doctor, Sri Ramakrishna said, \"A very pure
soul, unstained by the slightest touch of worldliness.

MANOMOHAN (to the doctor): \"He (pointing to the Master) says of your
son, \'I don\'t care for the father if I have the son.\' \"

DOCTOR: \"Ah, you see! That is why I say that you forget everything else
when you have the \'Son\'.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"I don\'t say that I do not want the Father.\"

DOCTOR: \"Yes, I understand you. How can you save your face unless you
say a few things like that?\"

MASTER: \"Your boy is quite guileless. One day Sambhu\'s face became red
as he said, \'God will surely listen to a man\'s prayer if he prays to
Him with sincerity.\'

\"Why am so fond of the boys? They are like unadulterated milk: only a
little boiling is needed. Moreover It can be offered to the Deity. But
milk adulterated with water needs much boiling. It consumes a large
quantity of fuel.

\"The boys are like fresh earthen pots, good vessels in which one can
keep milk without any worry. Spiritual instruction arouses their inner
consciousness without delay. But it is not so with the worldly-minded.
One is afraid to keep milk in a pot that has been used for curd. The
milk may turn sour.

\"Your boy is still free from worldliness, untouched by \'woman and
gold\'.\"

DOCTOR: \"That is because he is living on his father\'s earnings. I
should love to see how free he would keep himself from worldliness if he
had to earn his own livelihood.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, yes. That is true. But God is far, far away from the
worldly-minded. For those who have renounced the world He is in the palm
of the hand.

(To Dr. Sarkar and Dr. Dukari) \"But renunciation of \'woman and gold\'
is not meant for you. You may renounce these mentally. That is why I
said to the goswamis: \'Why do you speak of renunciation?\' That will
not do for you. You have to attend the daily worship of Syamasundar.\'

**Hard rules for sannyāsis**

\"Total renunciation is for sannyāsis. They must not look even at the
picture of a woman. To them a woman is poison. They must keep themselves
at least ten cubits away from her; and if that is not possible, at least
one cubit. And they must not talk much with a woman, no matter how
devout she may be. Further, they should choose their dwelling at a place
where they will never, or scarcely ever, see the face of a woman.

\"Money, too, is like poison to a sannyāsi . If he keeps money with him,
he has worries, pride, anger, and the desire for physical comforts.
Money inflames his rajas, which brings tamas in its train. Therefore a
sannyāsi must not touch \'gold\'. \'Woman and gold\' makes him forget
God.

\"For householders money is a means of getting food, clothes, and a
dwelling place, worshipping the Deity, and serving holy men and
devotees.

\"It is useless to try to hoard money. With great labour the bees build
a hive; but a man breaks it and takes the honey away.\"

DOCTOR: \"Whom shall we hoard for?- For a wicked son, perhaps.\"

MASTER: \"It is not a wicked son alone. Perhaps the wife is unchaste.
She may have a secret lover. Perhaps

she will give him your watch and chain!

\"You should not renounce woman, completly. It is not harmful for a
householder to live with his wife. But after the birth of one or two
children, husband and wife should live as brother and sister.

**\"Woman and gold\"**

\"It is attachment to \'woman and gold\' that begets pride of learning,
pride of money, and pride of social position.

\"One cannot attain divine knowledge till one gets rid of pride. Water
does not stay on the top of a mound; but into low land it flows in
torrents from all sides.\"

DOCTOR: \"But the water that flows into the low land from all sides
contains good water and bad water, muddy water and ditch-water. Again,
there are hollows on mountain-tops as well, as at Nainital and
Manasoravar. These contain only Pure water from the sky.\"

MASTER; \"Only pure water from the sky-that is good!\"

DOCTOR: \"Further, from an elevated place the water can be distributed
on all sides.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"A certain man came to possess a siddha mantra. He
then went to the top of a hill and cried aloud. \'Repeat this mantra and
you will realize God.\'\"

DOCTOR: \"Yes.\"

MASTER: \"But you must remember one thing. When his soul feels restless
for God, a man forgets the difference between good water and
ditch-water. In order to know God, he sometimes goes to good men,
sometimes to imperfect men. Dirty water cannot injure an aspirant if
God\'s grace descends on him. When God grants him Knowledge, He reveals
to the aspirant what is good and what is bad.

\"There may be hollows on the top of a hill, but they cannot exist on
the hill of the \'wicked ego\'. Only if it is an \'ego of Knowledge\' or
an \'ego of bhakti\', does the pure water from the sky collect there.

\"It is true that the water from a hill-top may flow in all directions,
but that is possible only from the hill of the \'ego of Knowledge\'.

**Preaching without God\'s command**

\"One cannot teach men without the command of God. After attaining
Knowledge, Sankaracharya retained the \'ego of Knowledge\' in order to
teach mankind. But to lecture without realizing God! What good will that
do?

\"I went to the Nandanbagan Brahmo Samaj . After the worship the
preacher gave a lecture from the raised platform. He had written it at
home. As he read from the manuscript he looked around. While meditating
he opened his eyes from time to time to look at people.

**Confusion of mere scholars**

\"The instruction of a man who has not seen God does not produce the
right effect. He may say one thing rightly, but he becomes confused
about the next.

\"Samadhyayi delivered a lecture. He said: \'God is beyond words and
mind; He is dry. Worship Him through the bliss of your love and
devotion.\' Just see, he thus described God, whose very nature is Joy
and Bliss! What will such a lecture accomplish? Can it teach people
anything? Such a lecturer is like the man who said, \'my uncle\'s
cow-shed is full of horses.\' Horses in the cow-shed! (All laugh.) From
that you can understand that there were no horses at all.\"

DOCTOR (smiling): \"Nor cows either!\" (All laugh.)

*Santhāl* woman. She was a valiant fighter. (All laugh.)

In the mean time the devotees who had been in a rapturous state had
regained their normal mood. The doctor was highly pleased with them and
asked M. about them. M. introduced to him Paltu, the younger Naren,
Bhupati, Sarat, Śaśi, and the other youngsters. About Śaśi, M. said,
\"He is going to appear for the B.A. examination.\"

The doctor was a little inattentive.

MASTER (to the doctor): \"Look here! Listen to what he is saying.\"

The doctor heard from M. about Śaśi.

MASTER (to the doctor, pointing to M.): \"He instructs the
school-boys.\"

DOCTOR: \"So I have heard.\"

MASTER: \"I am unlettered and yet educated people come here. How
amazing! You must admit that it is the play of God.\"

It was nine o\'clock in the evening. The doctor had been sitting there
since six o\'clock, watching all these things.

GIRISH (to the doctor): \"Well, sir, does it ever happen to you that,
though you do not intend to come here, you are drawn as if by a subtle
force? I feel that way; that is why I am asking you.\"

DOCTOR: \"I don\'t know whether I feel that. But the heart alone knows
the promptings of the heart. (To Sri Ramakrishna) Besides, there isn\'t
much use in speaking about it.\"

**October 24, 1885**

It was about one o\'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna was seated
on the second floor of the house at Syampukur. Dr. Sarkar, Narendra,
Mahimacharan, M., and other devotees were in the room. Referring to the
homeopathic system of medicine, the Master said to Dr. Sarkar, \"This
treatment of yours is very good.\"

DOCTOR: \"According to homeopathy the physician has to check up the
symptoms of the disease with the medical book. It is like Western music.
The singer follows the score.

\"Where is Girish Ghosh? Never mind. Don\'t trouble him. He didn\'t
sleep last night.\"

Dr. Sarkar explains samādhi

MASTER: \"Well, when I am in samādhi I feel intoxicated as if I were
drunk with siddhi. What have you to say about that?\"

DOCTOR (to M.): \"In that state the nerve centres cease to function.
Hence the limbs become numb. Again, the legs totter because all the
energy rushes toward the brain. Life consists of the nervous system.
There is a nerve centre in the nape of the neck called the medulla
oblongata. If that is injured, one may die.\"

Mahima Chakravarty began to describe the Kundalini. He said: \"The
Sushumna nerve runs through the spinal cord in a subtle form. None can
see it. That is what Śiva says.\"

DOCTOR: \"Śiva examined man only in his maturity. But the Europeans have
examined man in all stages of his life from the embryo to maturity. It
is good to know comparative history. From the history of the Sonthals
one

learns that Kāli was a

\"Don\'t laugh, please. Let me tell you how greatly the study of
comparative anatomy has benefited men. The difference between the
actions of the pancreatic juice and bile was at first unknown. But later
Claude Bernard examined the stomach, liver, and other paits of the
rabbit and demonstrated that the action of bile is different

from the action of the pancreatic juice. Therefore It stands to reason
that we should watch the lower animals as well. The study of man alone
is not enough.

\"Similarly, the study of comparative religion is highly beneficial.

\"Why do his \[meaning the Master\'s\] words go straight to our hearts?
He has experienced the truths of different religions. He himself has
practised the disciplines of the Hindu, Christian, Musslman, Sakta, and
Vaishnava religions. The bees can make good honey only if they gather
nectar from different flowers.\"

M. (to Dr. Sarkar): \"He (pointing to Mahimacharan) has studied science
a great deal\"

DOCTOR (smiling): \"What science? Do you mean Max Muller\'s Science of
Religion?\"

MAHIMA (to the Master): \"You are ill. But what can the doctor do about
it? When I heard of your illness, I thought that you were only going to
pamper the doctor\'s pride.\"

MASTER (pointing to Dr. Sarkar): \"But he is a very good physician. He
is very learned too.\"

MAHIMA: \"Yes, sir. He is a ship and we are only small boats.\"

Dr. Sarkar folded his hands in humility.

MAHIMIA: \"But here in the Master\'s presence all are equal\"

**Narendra\'s music**

Sri Ramakrishna asked Narendra to sing. Narendra sang:

> *I have made Thee, O Lord, the Pole-star of my life;*
>
> *No more shall I lose my way on the world\'s trackless sea. . . .*

Then he sang:

> *Ever insane with pride am I, and many the cravings of my heart! . .
> .*

He sang again:

> *This universe, wondrous and infinite,*
>
> *O Lord, is Thy handiwork;*
>
> *And the whole world is a treasure house*
>
> *Full of Thy beauty and grace.*

Narendra continued:

> *O Father of the Universe, upon Thy lofty throne,*
>
> *Thou dost enjoy the music of the worlds,*
>
> *As Thy creation\'s praise they sweetly sing.*
>
> *Behold, I too, though born of earth, have come with feeble voice*
>
> *Before the portal of Thy House.*
>
> *I seek alone Thy vision, Lord! I crave no other boon.*
>
> *Here I have come to sing my song for Thee;*
>
> *From a far comer of the mighty throng*
>
> *Where sun and moon are hymning Thee, I too would sing Thy praise:*
>
> *This is Thy lowly servant\'s prayer.*

He sang another song:

> *O King of Kings, reveal Thyself to me!*
>
> *I crave Thy mercy. Cast on me Thy glance!*
>
> *At Thy dear feet I dedicate my life,*
>
> *Seared in the fiery furnace of this world.*
>
> *My heart, alas, is deeply stained with sin;*
>
> *Ensnared in māyā, I am all but dead.*
>
> *Compassionate Lord! Revive my fainting soul*
>
> *With the life-giving nectar of Thy grace.*

Again:

> *Be drunk, O mind, be drunk with the Wine of Heavenly Bliss! Roll on
> the ground and weep, chanting Hari\'s sweet name! . . .*

MASTER: \"And sing that one- *\'All that exists art Thou.\'*

DOCTOR: \"Ah!\"

Narendra sang:

> *I have joined my heart to Thee: all that exists art Thou;*
>
> *Thee only have I found, for Thou art all that exists. .. . .*

The singing was over. Dr. Sarkar sat there almost spellbound. After a
time, with folded hands, he said very humbly to Sri Ramakrishna: \"Allow
me to take my leave now. I shall come again tomorrow.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, stay a little. Girish Ghosh has been sent for. (Pointing
to Mahima) He is a scholar, yet he dances in the name of Hari. He has no
pride. He went to Konnagar just because we were there. He is wealthy; he
is free; he serves nobody. (Pointing to Narendra) What do you think of
him?\"

DOCTOR: \"Excellent!\"

MASTER (pointing to a devotee) : \"And him?\"

DOCTOR: \"Splendid!\"

MAHlMA : \"It can by no means be said that one knows philosophy unless
one has read Hindu philosophy. The European philosophers do not know the
twenty-four cosmic principles of the Samkhya philosophy. They cannot
even grasp them.\"

**Mahima\'s three paths**

MASTER (smiling): \"What are the three paths you speak of?\"

MAHIMA: \"The path of Sat, which is the path of knowledge. Next, the
path of Chit, of yoga, of karma yoga, which includes the duties and
functions of the four stages of life. Last, the path of Ānanda, the path
of devotion and ecstatic love. You are an adept in all three paths; you
can speak of them all with authority.\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughed.

Dr. Sarkar took his leave. It was evening, the first night after the
full moon. Sri Ramakrishna stood up, lost in samādhi. Nityagopal stood
beside him in a reverent attitude.

Sri Ramakrishna took his seat. Nityagopal was stroking his feet.
Devendra, Kalipada, and many other devotees were seated by his side.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"My mind tells me that Nityagopal\'s present
state will undergo a change. His entire mind will be concentrated on
me-on Him who dwells in me. Don\'t you see how Narendra\'s whole mind is
being drawn toward me?\"

Many of the devotees were taking their leave. Sri Ramakrishna stood up.

**On japa**

Referring to japa, he said to a devotee: \"Japa means silently repeating
God\'s name in solitude. When you chant His name with single-minded
devotion you can see God\'s form and realize Him. Suppose there is a
piece of timber sunk in the water of the Ganges and fastened with a
chain to the bank. You proceed link by link, holding to the chain, and
you dive into the water and follow the chain. Finally you are able to
reach the timber. In the same way, by repeating God\'s name you become
absorbed in Him and finally realize Him.\"

KALIPADA (smiling, to the devotees): \"Ours is a grand teacher! We are
not asked to practise meditation, austerity, and other disciplines.\"

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna said, \"This is troubling me.\" The Master\'s
throat was hurting him. Devendra said, \"Your words cannot fool us any
more.\" He thought that the Master feigned illness to hoodwink the
devotees.

Most of the devotees departed. It was arranged that a few of the younger
men should stay to nurse the Master by turns. M. also was going to spend
the night there.

**Sunday, October 25,1885**

It was about half past six in the morning when M. arrived at Syampukur
and asked Sri Ramakrishna about his health. He was on his way to Dr.
Sarkar to report the Master\'s condition. The Master said to M: \'Tell
the doctor that during the early hours of the morning my mouth becomes
filled with water and I cough. Also ask him if I may take a bath.\"

After seven o\'clock M. came to Dr. Sarkar\'s house and told him about
the Master\'s condition. The physician\'s old teacher and one or two
friends were in the room. Dr. Sarkar said to his teacher, \"Sir, I have
been thinking of the Paramahamsa since three in the morning. I couldn\'t
sleep at all. Even now he is in my mind.\"

One of the doctor\'s friends said to him: \"Sir, I hear that some speak
of the Paramahamsa as an Incarnation of God. You see him every day. How
do you feel about it?\"

DOCTOR: \"I have the greatest regard for him as a man.\"

M. (to the doctor\'s friend): \"It is very kind of Dr. Sarkar to treat
him.\"

DOCTOR. \"Kindness? What do you mean?\"

M: \"Not toward him, but toward us.\"

DOCTOR: \"You see, you don\'t know my actual loss on account of the
Paramahamsa, Every day I fail to see two or three patients. When the
next day I go to their houses, of my own accord, I cannot accept any fee
since I am seeing them without being called. How can I charge them for
my visit?\"

**Dr. Sarkar on Mahima**

The conversation turned to Mahima Chakravarty. He had been with the
Master when Dr. Sarkar had visited him the previous Saturday. Pointing
to the doctor, Mahima had said to Sri Ramakrishna, \"Sir, you yourself
have created this disease in order to pamper the doctor\'s pride.\"

M. (to the doctor): \"Mahima Chakravarty used to come to your place to
attend your lectures on medical science.\"

DOCTOR: \"Is that so? How full of tamas he is! Didn\'t you notice it? I
saluted him as \'God\'s Lower Third\'. There exist in God sattva, rajas,
and tamas. Tamas is the third and an inferior quality. Didn\'t you hear
him say to the Paramahamsa, \'You yourself have created this disease in
order to pamper the doctor\'s pride\'?\"

M: \"Mahima Chakravarty believes that the Paramahamsa can cure his
disease himself, if he wants to.\"

DOCTOR: \"What? Cure that disease himself? Is that possible? We are
physicians; we know what cancer is. We ourselves cannot cure it. And he
to cure himself! Why, he doesn\'t know anything about cancer. (To his
friends )The illness is no doubt incurable, but these gentlemen have
been nursing him with sincere devotion.\"

M. requested the doctor to visit Sri Ramakrishna and returned home.

In the afternoon, about three o\'clock, M. came to the Master and
repeated the conversation he had had with Dr. Sarkar. He said to Sri
Ramakrishna, \"Today the doctor embarrassed me.\"

MASTER: \"What happened?\"

1.  \"Yesterday he heard here that you yourself had created this illness
    in order to pamper the doctor\'s pride.\" MASTER: \"Who made that
    remark?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Mahima Chakravarty.\"

MASTER: \"What did the doctor say to you?\'

1.  \"He described Mahima Chakravarty as \'God\'s Lower Third\'. Now he
    admits that all the qualities-sattva, rajas, and tamas-exist in God.
    (The Master laughs.) Then he told me that he had waked at three in
    the morning and had been thinking of you ever since. When I saw him
    it was eight o\'clock. He said to me, \'Even now the Paramahamsa is
    in my mind.\' \"

MASTER (laughing): \"You see, he has studied English. I cannot ask him
to meditate on me; but he is doing it all the same, of his own accord.\"

1.  \"He also said about you, \'I have the greatest regard for him as a
    man.\' MASTER: \"Did you talk of anything else?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"I asked him, \'What is your suggestion today about the patient?\'
    He said: \'Suggestion? Hang it! I shall have to go to him again
    myself. What else shall I suggest?\' (Sri Ramakrishna laughs.)
    Further he said: \'You don\'t know how much money I am losing every
    day. Every day I miss two or three calls.\' \"

**Vijay Goswami**

There were many devotees, including Narendranath, in the room;
Vijaykrishna Goswami arrived and respectfully took the dust of the
Master\'s feet. Several Brahmo devotees came with him. Vijay had cut off
his connection with the Brahmo Samaj and was practising spiritual
discipline independently. Sri Ramakrishna was very fond of him on
account of his piety and devotion. Though not a disciple of the Master,
Vijay held him in very high respect. He had lived in Dāccā a long time.
Recently he had visited many sacred places in upper India.

MAHIMA CHAKRAVARTY (to Vijay): \"Sir, you have visited many holy places
and new countries. Please tell us some of your experiences.\"

VIJAY: \"What shall I say? I realize that everything is here where we
are sitting now. This roaming about is useless. At other places I have
seen two, five, ten, or twenty-five per cent of him \[meaning the
Master\], at the most. Here alone I find the full one hundred per cent
manifestation of God.\"

MAHIMA: \"You are right, sir. Again, It is he \[the Master\] who makes
us, roam about or remain in one place.\"

MASTER (to Narendra): \"See what a change has come over Vijay\'s mind.
He is an altogether different person. He is like thick milk from which
all the water has been boiled off. You see, I can recognize a
paramahamsa by his neck and forehead. Yes, I can recognize a
paramahamsa.\"

MAHIMA (to Vijay): \"Sir, you seem to eat less now. Isn\'t that so?\"

VIJAY: \"Perhaps you are right. (To the Master) I heard about your
illness and have come to see you. Again, in Dāccā-\"

MASTER: \"What about Dāccā?\"

Vijay did not reply and was silent a few moments.

VIJAY; \"It is difficult to understand him \[meaning the Master\] unless
he reveals himself. Here alone is the one hundred per cent manifestation
of God.\"

MASTER: \"Kedār said the other day, at other places we don\'t get
anything to eat, but here we get a stomachful!\'\"

MAHIMA: \"Why a stomachful? It overflows the stomach.\"

**Master in ecstasy**

VIJAY (to the Master, with folded hands): \"I have now realized who you
are. You don\'t have to tell me.\"

MASTER (in a state of ecstasy): \"If so, then so be it!\"

Saying, \"Yes, I have understood\", Vijay fell prostrate before the
Master. He held the Master\'s feet on his chest and clung to them. The
Master was in deep samādhi, motionless as a picture. The devotees were
overwhelmed by this sight. Some burst into tears and some chanted sacred
hymns. All eyes were riveted on Sri Ramakrishna. They viewed him in
different ways, according to their spiritual unfoldment: some as a great
devotee, some as a holy man, and some as God Incarnate.

Mahimacharan sang, with tears in his eyes:

> *\"Behold, behold the embodiment of Love Divine!\"*

Now and then he chanted, as if enjoying a glimpse of Brahman:

> *The Transcendental, beyond the One and the many,
> Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute.*

NavaGopal was weeping. Bhupati sang:

> *Hallowed be Brahman, the Absolute, the Infinite, the Fathomless!*
>
> *Higher than the highest, deeper than the deepest depths!*
>
> *Thou art the Light of Truth, the Fount of Love, the Home of Bliss!*
>
> *This universe with all its manifold and blessed modes*
>
> *Is but the enchanting poem of Thine inexhaustible thought;*
>
> *Its beauty overflows on every side.*
>
> *O Thou Poet, great and primal, in the rhythm of Thy thought*
>
> *The sun and moon arise and move toward their setting;*
>
> *The stars, shining like bits of gems, are the fair characters*
>
> *In which Thy song is written across the blue expanse of sky;*
>
> *The year, with its six seasons, in tune with the happy earth,*
>
> *Proclaims Thy glory to the end of time.*
>
> *The colours of the flowers reveal Thy sovereign Beauty,*
>
> *The waters in their stillness, Thy deep Serenity;*

*The thunder-clap unveils to us the terror of Thy Law.*

Premdas says:

> *Deep is Thine Essence, truly; how can a foolish mind perceive it?*
>
> *Wondering, It meditates on Thee from yuga to yuga\'s end*
>
> *Millions upon millions of suns and moons and stars*
>
> *Bow down to Thee, O Lord, in rapturous awe!*
>
> *Beholding Thy creation, men and women weep for joy;*
>
> *The gods and angels worship Thee, O All-pervading Presence!*
>
> *O Thou, the Fount of Goodness, bestow on us Thy Knowledge;*
>
> *Bestow on us devotion, bestow pure love and perfect peace;*
>
> *And grant us shelter at Thy hallowed feet!*

Bhupati sang again:

> *Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness waves of ecstatic love arise:*
>
> *Rapture divine! Play of God\'s Bliss!*
>
> *Oh, how enthralling! . . .*

He sang a third song:

> *Here vanish my fear and my delusion, my piety, rituals, and good
> works;*
>
> *Here vanish my pride of race and caste! Where am I? Where art Thou, O
> Hari?*
>
> *Thou hast stolen my life and soul, and now, O Friend, Thou dost
> desert me:*
>
> *Ah, what a fool I was to come here to the shore of this Sea of Love!*
>
> *Full to the brim with heavenly bliss is filled this little soul of
> mine;*
>
> *Hearken, one and all! This in truth is the way of God!*

After a long time Sri Ramakrishna regained consciousness of the world.

MASTER (to M.): \"Something happens to me in that state of intoxication.
Now I feel ashamed of myself. In that state I feel as if I were
possessed by a ghost. I cease to be my own self. While coming down from
that state I cannot count correctly. Trying to count, I say, \'One,
seven, eight\', or some such thing.\"

NARENDRA: \"It is because everything is one.\"

MASTER: \"No, It is beyond one and two.\"

MAHIMA: \"Yes, you are right. \'It is neither one nor two.\'\"

MASTER: \"There reason withers away. God cannot be realized through
scholarship. He is beyond the scriptures-the Vedas, Puranas, and
Tantras. If I see a man with even one book in his hand, I call him a
rajarshi though he is a Jnāni. But the brahmarshi has no outer sign
whatsoever.

**Use of scriptures**

\"Do you know the use of the scriptures? A man once wrote a letter to a
relative, asking him to send five seers of sweetmeats and a piece of
cloth.

The relative received the letter, read it, and remembered about the
sweetmeats and the cloth. Then, he threw the letter away. Of what
further use was it?\"

VIJAY: \"I see that the sweetmeat has been sent.\"

**God\'s Incarnation as man**

MASTER: \"God incarnates Himself on earth in a human body. He is, no
doubt, present everywhere and in all beings, but man\'s longing is not
satisfied unless he sees God in a human form. Man\'s need is not
satisfied without the Divine Incarnation. Do you know what it is like?
By touching any part of a cow you undoubtedly touch the cow herself.
Even by touching her horns you touch the cow. But the milk comes through
the cow\'s udder.\"

MAHIMA: \"If a man wants milk he must put his mouth to the udder. What
will he get by sucking the horns?\" (All laugh.)

VIJAY: \"But a calf at first licks other parts of the cow.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"True. But seeing the calf doing so, someone perhaps
puts its mouth to the udder.\" (All laugh.)

The conversation was thus going on, when Dr. Sarkar came into the room
and took a seat. He said to the Master: \"I woke up at three this
morning, greatly worried that you might catch cold. Oh, I thought many
other things about you.\"

MASTER: \"I have been coughing and my throat is sore. In the small hours
of the morning my mouth was filled with water. My whole body is
aching.\"

DOCTOR: \"Yes, I heard all about it this morning.\"

Mahimacharan told of his trip to various parts of the country and said
that in Ceylon no man laughed. Dr. Sarkar said, \"It may be so; but I
shall have to inquire about it.\" (All laugh.)

The conversation turned to the duties of life.

**The duty of a physician**

MASTER (to the doctor): \"Many think that the duty of a physician is a
very noble one. The physician is undoubtedly a noble man if he treats
his patients free, out of compassion and moved by their suffering. Then
his work may be called very uplifting. But a physician becomes cruel and
callous if he carries on his profession for money. It is very mean to do
such things as examine urine and stool in order to earn money, like a
business man carrying on his trade.\"

DOCTOR: \"You are right. It is undoubtedly wrong for a physician to
perform his duties in that spirit. But I don\'t like to brag before
you.\"

MASTER: \"But the medical profession is certainly very noble if the
physician devotes himself to the welfare of others in an unselfish
spirit.

**Cultivating holy company**

\"Whatever may be a householder\'s profession, It is necessary for him
to live in the company of holy men now and then. If a man loves God, he
will himself seek the company of holy men. I give the illustration of
the hemp-smoker. One hemp-smoker loves the company of another
hemp-smoker. At the sight of a person who does not smoke, he goes away
with downcast eyes or hides himself in a comer; but his joy is unbounded
if he meets a hemp addict. Perhaps they embrace each other. (All laugh.)
Again, a vulture loves the company of another vulture.\"

DOCTOR: \"It has also been noticed that a vulture runs away for fear of
a crow. In my opinion one should serve all creatures, not men alone.
Often I feed the sparrows with flour. I throw small pellets of flour to
them and they come in swarms. They love to eat them.\"

MASTER: Bravo! That\'s grand. Holy men should feed other creatures.They
feed ants with sugar.\"

DOCTOR: \"Will there be no singing today?\"

MASTER (to Narendra): \"Why don\'t you sing a little?\"

**Narendra sings**

Narendra sang to the accompaniment of the Tānpura and other instruments:

> *Sweet is Thy name, O Refuge of the humble!*
>
> *It falls like sweetest nectar on our ears*
>
> *And comforts us, Beloved of our souls!*
>
> *The priceless treasure of Thy name alone*
>
> *Is the abode of Immortality,*
>
> *And he who chants Thy name becomes immortal.*
>
> *Falling upon our ears, Thy holy name*
>
> *Instantly slays the anguish of our hearts,*
>
> *Thou Soul of our souls, and fills our hearts with bliss!*

Narendra sang again:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason?*
>
> *Make me drunk with Thy love\'s Wine;*
>
> *O Thou who stealest Thy bhaktas\' hearts,*
>
> *Drown me deep in the Sea of Thy love!*
>
> *Here in this world, this madhouse of Thine,*
>
> *Some laugh, some weep, some dance for joy:*
>
> *Jesus, Buddha, Moses, Gaurānga,*
>
> *All are drunk with the Wine of Thy love*
>
> *O Mother, when shall I be blessed*
>
> *By joining their blissful company?*

A strange transformation came over the devotees. They all became mad, as
it were, with divine ecstasy. The pundit stood up, forgetting the pride
of his scholarship, and cried:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason?*

Vijay was the first on his feet, carried away by divine intoxication.
Then Sri Ramakrishna stood up, forgetting all about his painful and
fatal illness. The doctor, who had been sitting in front of him, also
stood up. Both patient and physician forgot themselves in the spell
created by Narendra\'s music. The younger Naren and Lātu went into deep
samādhi. The atmosphere of the room became electric. Everyone felt the
presence of God. Dr. Sarkar, eminent scientist that he was stood
breathless, watching this strange scene. He noticed that the devotees
who had gone into samādhi were utterly unconscious of the outer world.
All were motionless and transfixed. After a while, as they came down a
little to the plane of the relative world, some laughed and some wept.
An outsider, entering the room, would have thought that a number of
drunkards were assembled there.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna resumed his conversation, the devotees
taking their seats. It was about eight o\'clock in the evening.

MASTER: \"You have just noticed the effect of divine ecstasy. What does
your \'science\' say about that? Do you think it is a mere hoax?\"

**Doctor suppresses his emotion**

DOCTOR (to the Master): \"I must say that this is all natural, when so
many people have experienced it. It cannot be a hoax. (To Narendra)

When you sang the lines:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason?*

I could hardly control myself. I was about to jump to my feet. With
great difficulty I suppressed my emotion. I said to myself, \'No, I must
not display my feelings.\' \"

MASTER (with a smile, to the doctor): \"You are unshakable and
motionless, like Mount Sumeru. You are a very deep soul. Nobody could
perceive the deep emotion of Rupa and Sanatana. If an elephant enters a
small pool, there is a splashing of water on all sides. But this does
not happen when it plunges into a big lake; hardly anyone notices it.
Radha once said to her companion: \'Friend, you are weeping so much at
our separation from Sri Krishna. But look at me. How stony my heart is!
There is not a tear in my eyes.\' Brinde, her friend, replied: \'yes,
your eyes are dry. But there is a deep meaning in it. A fire of grief is
constantly raging in your heart because of your separation from Krishna.
No sooner do the tears gather in your eyes than they are dried up in the
heat of that fire.\'

DOCTOR: \"Nobody can beat you in talk!\" (Laughter.)

The conversation turned to other things. Sri Ramakrishna described to
the doctor his ecstasies at Dakshineswar. He also told him how to
control anger,lust, and the other passions.

DOCTOR: \"I have heard the story that you were once lying on the ground
unconscious in samādhi when a wicked man kicked you with his boots\"

MASTER: \"You must have heard it from M. The man was Chandra Haldar, a
priest of the Kāli temple at KaliGhat; he often came to Mathur Babu\'s
house. One day I was lying on the ground in an ecstatic mood. The room
was dark. Chandra Haldar thought I was feigning that state in order to
win Mathur\'s favour. He entered the room and kicked me several times
with his boots. It left black marks on my body. Everybody wanted to tell
Mathur Babu about it, but I forbade them.\"

DOCTOR: \"This is also due to the will of God. Thus you have taught
people how to control anger and practise forgiveness.\"

In the mean time Vijay had become engaged in conversation with the other
devotees.

VIJAY: \"I feel as if someone were always moving with me. He shows me
what is happening even at a distance.\"

NARENDRA: \"Like a guardian angel\"

VIJAY: \"I have seen him \[meaning the Master\] in Dāccā. I even touched
his body.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"It must have been someone else.\"

NARENDRA: \"I too have seen him many a time. (To Vijay) How can I say I
do not believe your words?\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 47**

THE MASTER\'S TRAINING OF HIS DISCIPLES

> Monday, October 26, 1885

IT WAS ABOUT TEN O\'CLOCK in the morning when M. arrived at the
Syampukur house on his way to Dr.

Sarkar to report the Master\'s condition.

Dr. Sarkar had declared the illness incurable. His words cast gloom over
the minds of the Master\'s devotees and disciples. With unflagging
devotion and zeal they nursed the patient-their teacher, guide,
philosopher, and friend. A band of young disciples, led by Narendra, was
preparing to renounce the world and dedicate their lives to the
realization of God and the service of humanity. People flocked to the
Master day and night. In spite of the excruciating pain in his throat,
he welcomed them all with a cheerful face. There seemed to be no limit
to his solicitude for their welfare. His face beamed as he talked to
them about God. Dr. Sarkar, seeing that conversation aggravated the
illness, forbade him to talk to people. \"You must not talk to others,\"
the physician had said to the Master, \"but you may make an exception in
my case.\" The doctor used to spend six or seven hours in Sri
Ramakrishna\'s company, drinking in every word that fell from his lips.

MASTER: \"I am feeling much relieved. I am very well today. Is It
because of the medicine? Then why shouldn\'t I continue it?\"

1.  \"I am going to the doctor. I shall tell him everything. He will
    advise what is best.\" MASTER: \"I haven\'t seen Purna for two or
    three days. I am worried about him.\"

M. (to Kāli): \"Why don\'t you see Purna and ask him to come?\"

KĀLI: \"I shall go immediately.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"The doctor\'s son is a nice boy. Please ask him to
come.\" M. arrived at Dr. Sarkar\'s house and found him with two or
three friends.

DOCTOR (to M.): \"I was talking about you just a minute ago. You said
you would come at ten; I have been waiting for you an hour and a half.
Your delay has made me worry about him \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\].

(To a friend) \"Please sing that song.\"

The friend sang:

> *Proclaim the glory of God\'s name as long as life remains in you;*
>
> *The dazzling splendour of His radiance floods the universe!*
>
> *Like nectar streams His boundless love, filling the hearts of men
> with joy:*
>
> *The very thought of His compassion sends a thrill through every
> limb!*
>
> *How can one fittingly describe Him? Through His abounding grace*
>
> *The bitter sorrows of this life are all forgotten instantly.*
>
> *On every side-on land below, in sky above, beneath the seas:*
>
> *In every region of this earth-men seek Him tirelessly,*
>
> *And as they seek Him, ever ask: Where is His limit, where His end?*
>
> *True Wisdom\'s Dwelling-place is He, the Elixir of Eternal Life,*
>
> *The Sleepless, Ever-wakeful Eye, the Pure and Stainless One:*
>
> *The vision of His face removes all trace of sorrow from our hearts.*

DOCTOR (to M.): \"Isn\'t it a beautiful song? How do you like that line,
\'Where is His limit, where His end?\' \"

> M: \"Yes, that\'s a very fine line. It fills the mind with the idea of
> the Infinite.\"
>
> DOCTOR (tenderly, to M.): \"It is already late in the morning. Have
> you taken your lunch? I finish mine before ten and then begin my
> professional calls; otherwise I don\'t feel well. Look here, I have
> been thinking of giving a feast to you all \[meaning Sri
> Ramakrishna\'s devotees\] one day.\"
>
> M: \"That will be fine, sir.\"
>
> DOCTOR: \"Where shall I arrange it? Here or at the Syampukur house?
> Whatever you suggest.\"

1.  \"It doesn\'t matter, sir. Wherever you arrange it we shall be very
    > happy to dine with you.\" The conversation turned to Kāli, the
    > Divine Mother.

> DOCTOR: \"Kāli is an old hag of the Sonthals.\"
>
> M. burst into loud laughter and said, \"Where did you get that?\"
> DOCTOR: \"Oh, I have heard something like that.\" (M. laughs.)
>
> **Dr. Sarkar on ecstasy**
>
> They began to talk about the ecstasy that Vijay and the others had
> experienced the previous day in the Master\'s room. The doctor also
> had been present on the occasion.
>
> DOCTOR: \"Yes, I witnessed that ecstasy. But is excessive ecstasy good
> for one?\"

1.  \"The Master says that an excess of ecstasy harms no one, if it is
    > the result of the contemplation of God. He further says that the
    > lustre of a gem gives light and soothes the body; It does not
    > burn.\"

> DOCTOR: \"Oh, the lustre of a gem! That\'s only a reflected light.\"

1.  \"He also says that a man does not die by sinking in the Lake of
    > Immortality. God is that Lake. A plunge in that Lake does not
    > injure a man; on the contrary it makes him immortal. Of course, he
    > will become immortal only if he has faith in God.\"

> DOCTOR: \"Yes, that is true.\"
>
> The doctor took M. in his carriage. He had to see a few patients on
> the way to Syampukur. They continued their conversation in the
> carriage. Dr. Sarkar referred to Mahima Chakravarty\'s pride.
>
> **Master\'s humility & M. and Dr. Sarkar**

1.  \"He visits the Master. Even if he has a little pride, it will not
    > last long. If one only sits in the Master\'s presence awhile,
    > one\'s pride crumbles to pieces. It is because the Master himself
    > is totally free from egotism. Pride cannot exist in the presence
    > of humility. A celebrated man like Pundit Iswar Chandra Vidyāsāgar
    > showed great modesty and humility in the Master\'s presence. The
    > Paramahamsa visited his house; it was nine o\'clock in the evening
    > when the Master took his leave. Vidyāsāgar came all the way from
    > the library to the gate of his compound to see him off. He himself
    > carried the light to show the way. As the Master\'s carriage
    > started off, Vidysagar stood there with folded hands.\"

> DOCTOR: \"Well, what does Vidyāsāgar think of him?\"

1.  \"That day he showed the Master great respect. But when I talked
    with him later, I found out that he didn\'t much care for what the
    Vaishnavas call emotion or ecstasy. He shares your views on such
    things.\"

> DOCTOR: \"Neither do I care very much for any such display of emotion
> as folding one\'s hands or touching

others\' feet with one\'s head. To me the head is the same as the feet.
But if a man thinks differently of the feet, let him do whatever he
likes.\"

1.  \"We know that you do not care for a display of feelings. Perhaps
    you remember that the Master now and then refers to you as a \'deep
    soul\'. He said to you yesterday that when an elephant plunges into
    a small pool it makes a big splash, but when it goes into a big lake
    you see hardly a ripple. The elephant of emotion cannot produce any
    effect at all in a deep soul. The Master says that you are a \'deep
    soul\'.\"

DOCTOR: \"I don\'t deserve the compliment. After all, what is bhava? It
is only a feeling. There are other aspects of feeling, such as bhakti.
When it runs to excess, some can suppress It and some cannot.\"

1.  \"Divine ecstasy may or may not be explainable; but, sir, it cannot
    be denied that ecstasy, or love of God, is a unique thing. I have
    seen in your library Stebbing\'s book on Darwinism. According to
    Stebbing the human mind is wonderful, whether it be the result of
    evolution or of special creation. He gives a beautiful illustration
    from the theory of light. Light is wonderful, whether you know the
    wave theory of light or not.\"

DOCTOR: \"Yes. Have you noticed further that Stebbing accepts both
Darwin and God?\"

The conversation again turned to Sri Ramakrishna.

DOCTOR: \"I find that he is a worshipper of the Goddess Kāli.\"

**Master\'s conception of Kāli**

1.  \"But with him the meaning of Kāli is different. What the Vedas call
    the Supreme Brahman, he calls Kāli. What the Musslmans call Allah
    and the Christians call God, he calls Kāli. He does not see many
    gods; he sees only one God. What the Brahma jnanis of olden times
    called Brahman, what the yogis call Ātman and the bhaktas call the
    Bhagavan, he calls Kāli.

**Depth of Sri Ramakrishna\'s experiences**

\"In Sri Ramakrishna one finds all the attitudes and ideals of religion.
That is why people of all sects and creeds enjoy peace and blessedness
in his presence. Who can fathom his feeling and tell us the depth of his
inner experience?\"

DOCTOR: \" \'All things to all men.\' I don\'t approve of it although
St. Paul says it.\"

1.  \"Who can understand the state of his mind? We have heard from him
    that unless one is engaged in the yarn trade, one cannot tell the
    difference between number forty and number forty-one yarn. Only a
    painter can appreciate another painter. The mind of a saint is very
    deep. One cannot understand all the aspects of Christ unless one is
    Christlike. Perhaps the deep realization of the Master is what
    Christ meant when He said: \'Be ye perfect as your Father in Heaven
    is perfect.\'\"

DOCTOR: \"What arrangements have you made about having him nursed?\"

1.  \"At present one of the older devotees is assigned every day to look
    after him. It may be Girish Babu or Ram Babu or Balarām or Suresh
    Babu or Navagopal or Kāli Babu. It is that way.\"

It was about one o\'clock in the afternoon when the doctor and M.
entered the Master\'s room on the second floor. Sri Ramakrishna sat
there, smiling as usual, completely forgetful of the fatal illness,
which was eating his life away. Among the many devotees in the room were
Girish, the younger Naren, and Sarat. Sometimes they were motionless,
like the snake before its charmer, and sometimes they displayed great
joy, like the bridal party with the bridegroom. The doctor and M. bowed
low before the Master and sat on the floor. At the sight of the doctor,
the Master said, laughing, \"Today I have been feeling very well.\"

Then the Master went on with his soul-enthralling conversation.

**Futility of mere scholarship**

MASTER: \"What will mere scholarship accomplish without discrimination
and renunciation? I go into a strange mood while thinking of the Lotus
Feet of God. The cloth on my body drops to the ground and I feel
something creeping up from my feet to the top of my head. In that state
I regard all as mere straw. If I see a pundit without discrimination and
love of God, I regard him as a bit of straw.

\"One day Dr.Rāmnārāyan had been arguing with me, when suddenly I went
into that mood. I said to him: \'What are you saying? What can you
understand of God by reasoning? How little you can understand of His
creation! Shame! You have the pettifogging mind of a weaver!\' Seeing
the state of my mind he began to weep and gently stroked my feet.\"

DOCTOR: \"Ramnarayan did that because he is a Hindu. Besides, he is a
believer in flowers and sandal-paste. He is an orthodox Hindu.\"

M. (to himself): \"Dr. Sarkar says that he has nothing to do with gong
and conch-shells!\"

**Master on Bankim**

MASTER: \"Bankim is one of your pundits. I met him once. I asked him,
\'What is the duty of man?\' And he had the impudence to say, \'Eating,
sleeping, and sex gratification.\' These words created in me a feeling
of great aversion. I said: \'What are you saying? You are very mean.
What you think day and night and what you do all the time come out
through your lips. If a man eats radish, he belches radish.\' Then we
talked about God a great deal. There was also much devotional music in
the room, and I danced. Then Bankim said to me, \'Sir, please come to
our house once.\' \'That depends on the will of God\', I replied.
\'There also\', he said, \'you will find devotees of God.\' I laughed
and said: \'What kind of devotees are they? Are they like those who
said, \"Gopal! Gopal!\"? \' \"

DOCTOR: \"What is the story of \'Gopal! Gopal!\'? \"

MASTER (with a smile): \"There was a goldsmith who kept a jewellery
shop. He looked like a great devotee, a true Vaishnava, with beads
around his neck, rosary in his hand, and the holy marks on his forehead.
Naturally people trusted him and came to his shop on business. They
thought that, being such a pious man, he would never cheat them.
Whenever a party of customers entered the shop, they would hear one of
his craftsmen say, \'Kesava! Kesava!\' Another would say, after a while,
\'Gopal! Gopal!\' Then a third would mutter, \'Hari! Hari!\' Finally
someone would say, \'Hara! Hara!\' Now these are, as you know, different
names of God. Hearing so much chanting of God\'s names, the customers
naturally thought that this goldsmith must be a very superior person.
But can you guess the goldsmith\'s true intention? The man who said
\'Kesava! Kesava!\' meant to ask, who are these?-\'who are these
customers?\' The man who said \'Gopal! Gopal!\' conveyed the idea that
the customers were merely a herd of cows. That was the estimate he
formed of them after the exchange of a few words. The man who said
\'Hari! Hari!\' asked, \'Since they are no better than a herd of cows,
then may we rob them?\' He who said \'Hara! Hara!\' gave his assent,
meaning by these words, \'Do rob by all means, since they are mere
cows!\' (All laugh.)

\"Once I went to a certain place with Mathur Babu. Many pundits came
forward to argue with me. And you all know that I am a fool. (All
laugh.) The pundits saw that strange mood of mine. When the conversation
was over, they said to me: \'Sir, after hearing your words, all that we
have studied before, our knowledge and scholarship, has proved to be
mere spittle. Now we realize that a man does not lack wisdom if he has
the grace of God. The fool becomes wise and the mute eloquent.\'
Therefore I say that a man does not become a scholar by the mere study
of books.

**Divine Knowledge is inexhaustible**

\"Yes, how true it is! How can a man who has the grace of God lack
knowledge? Look at me. I am a fool. I do not know anything. Then who is
it that utters these words? The reservoir of the Knowledge of God is
inexhaustible. There are grain-dealers at Kamarpukur. When selling
paddy, one man weighs the grain on the scales and another man pushes it
to him from a heap. It is the duty of the second man to keep a constant

supply of grain on the scales by pushing it from the big heap. It is the
same with my words. No sooner are they about to run short than the
Divine Mother sends a new supply from Her Inexhaustible storehouse of
Knowledge.

**Master\'s unique experience**

\"During my boyhood God manifested Himself in me. I was then eleven
years old. One day, while I was walking across a paddy field, I saw
something. Later on I came to know from people that I had been
unconscious, and my body totally motionless. Since that day I have been
an altogether different man. I began to see another person within me.
When I used to conduct the worship in the temple, my hand, instead of
going toward the Deity, would very often come toward my head, and I
would put flowers there. A young man who was then staying with me did
not dare approach me. He would say: \'I see a light on your face. I am
afraid to come very near you.\'

\"You know I am a fool. I know nothing. Then who is it that says all
these things? I say to the Divine Mother: \'O Mother, I am the machine
and Thou art the Operator. I am the house and Thou art the Indweller. I
am the chariot and Thou art the Charioteer. I do as Thou makest me do; I
speak as Thou makest me speak; I move as Thou makest me move. It is not
I! It is not I! It is all Thou! It is all Thou!\' Hers is the glory; we
are only Her instruments. Once Radha, to prove her chastity, carried on
her head a pitcher filled with water. The pitcher had a thousand holes,
but not a drop of water spilled. People began to praise her, saying,
\'Such a chaste woman the world will never see again!\' Then Radha said
to them: Why do you praise me? Say: *Glory unto Krishna! Hail Krishna!*
I am only His handmaid.\'

\"Once in that strange mood of mine I placed my foot on Vijay\'s chest.
You know how greatly I respect him-and I placed my foot on his body!
What do you say to that?\"

DOCTOR: \"But now you should be careful.\"

**The will of God**

MASTER (with folded hands): \"What can I do? I become completely
unconscious in that mood, then I do not know at all what I am doing.\"

DOCTOR: \"You should be careful. No use folding your hands now and
expressing regret!\"

MASTER: \"Can I do anything myself in that mood? What do you think of
this state? If you think it is a hoax, then I should say that your study
of \'science\' and all that is bosh!\"

DOCTOR: \"Now listen, sir! Would I come to see you so often if I thought
it all a hoax? You know that I neglect many other duties in order to
come here. I cannot visit many patients, for I spend six or seven hours
at a stretch here.\"

MASTER: \"Once I said to Mathur Babu: \'Don\'t think that I have
achieved my desired end because you, a rich man, show me respect. It
matters very little to me whether you obey me or not.\' Of course you
must remember that a mere man can do nothing, it is God alone who makes
one person obey another. Man is straw and dust before the power of
God.\"

DOCTOR: \"Do you think I shall obey you because a certain fisherman
obeyed you? Undoubtedly I show you respect; I show you respect as a
man.\"

MASTER: \"Do I ask you to show me respect?\"

**Dr. Sarkar and Girish**

GIRISH: \"Does he ask you to show him respect?\"

DOCTOR (to the Master): \"What are you saying? Do you explain it as the
will of God?\"

MASTER: \"What else can it be? What can a man do before the will of God?
Arjuna said to Sri Krishna on the battle-field of Kurukshetra \'I will
not fight. It is impossible for me to kill my own kinsmen.\' Sri Krishna
replied: \'Arjuna, you will have to fight. Your very nature will make
you fight.\' Then Sri Krishna revealed to Arjuna that all the men on the
battlefield were already dead.

\"Once some Sikhs came to the Kāli temple at Dakshineswar. They said:
\'You see, the leaves of the Aśwattha tree are moving. That too is due
to the will of God.\' Without His will not even a leaf can move.\"

DOCTOR: \"If everything is done by the will of God, then why do you
chatter? Why do you talk so much to bring knowledge to others?\"

MASTER: \"He makes me talk; therefore I talk. \'I am the machine and He
is the Operator.\' \"

DOCTOR: \"You say that you are the machine. That\'s all right. Or keep
quiet, knowing that everything is God.\"

GIRISH (to the doctor): \"Whatever you may think, sir, the truth is that
we act because He makes us act. Can anyone take a single step against
the Almighty Will?\"

**Free will and God\'s will**

DOCTOR: \"But God has also given us free will. I can think of God, or
not, as I like.\"

GIRISH: \"You think of God or do some good work because you like to.
Really it is not you who do these things, but your liking of them that
makes you do so.\"

DOCTOR: \"Why should that be so? I do these things as my duty.\"

GIRISH: \"Even then it is because you like to do your duty.\"

DOCTOR: \"Suppose a child is being burnt. From a sense of duty I rush to
save it.\"

GIRISH: \"You feel happy to save the child; therefore you rush into the
fire. It is your happiness that drives you to the action. A man eats
opium being tempted by such relishes as puffed rice or fried potatoes.\"
(Laughter.)

MASTER: \"A man must have some kind of faith before he undertakes a
work. Further, he feels joy when he thinks of it. Only then does he set
about performing the work. Suppose a jar of gold coins is hidden
underground. First of all a man must have faith that the jar of gold
coins is there. He feels joy at the thought of the jar. Then he begins
to dig. As he removes the earth he hears a metallic sound. That
increases his joy. Next he sees a corner of the jar. That gives him more
joy. Thus his joy is ever on the increase. Standing on the porch of the
Kāli temple, I have watched the ascetics preparing their smoke of hemp.
I have seen their faces beaming with joy in anticipation of the smoke.\"

DOCTOR: \"But take the case of fire. It gives both heat and light. The
light no doubt illumines objects, but the heat burns the body. Likewise,
it is not an unadulterated joy that one reaps from the performance duty.
Duty has its painful side too.\"

M. (to Girish): \"As the proverb goes: \'If the stomach gets food, then
the back can bear a few blows from the host.\' There is joy in sorrow
also.\"

GIRISH (to the doctor): \"Duty is dry.\"

DOCTOR: \"Why so?\"

GIRISH: \"Then it is pleasant.\" (All laugh.)

M: \"Again we come to the point that one likes opium for the sake of the
relishes that are served with it.\"

GIRISH (to the doctor): \"Duty must be pleasant; or why do you perform
it?\"

DOCTOR: \"The mind is inclined that way.\"

M. (to Girish): \"That wretched inclination draws the mind. If you speak
of the compelling power of inclination, then where is free will?\"

DOCTOR: \"I do not say that the will is absolutely free. Suppose a cow
is tied with a rope. She is free within the length of that rope, but
when she feels the pull of the rope-\"

MASTER: \"Jadu Mallick also gave that illustration. (To the younger
Naren) Is it mentioned in some English book?

**God alone is the agent**

(To the doctor) \"Look here. If a man truly believes that God alone does
everything, that He is the Operator and man the machine, then such a man
is verily liberated in life. \'Thou workest Thine own work; men only
call it theirs.\' Do you know what it is like? Vedānta philosophy gives
an illustration. Suppose you are cooking rice in a pot, with potato,
egg-plant, and other vegetables. After a while the potatoes, eggplant,
rice, and the rest begin to jump about in the pot. They seem to say with
pride: \'We are moving! We are jumping!\' The children see it and think
the potatoes, egg-plant, and rice are alive and so they jump that way.
But the elders, who know, explain to the children that the vegetables
and the rice are not alive; they jump not of themselves, but because of
the fire under the pot; if you remove the burning wood from the hearth,
then they will move no more. Likewise the pride of man, that he is the
doer, springs from ignorance. Men are powerful because of the power of
God. All becomes quiet when that burning wood is taken away. The puppets
dance well on the stage when pulled by a wire, but they cannot move when
the wire snaps.

\"A man will cherish the illusion that he is the doer as long as he has
not seen God, as long as he has not touched the Philosopher\'s Stone. So
long will he know the distinction between his good and bad actions. This
awareness of distinction is due to God\'s māyā; and it is necessary for
the purpose of running His illusory world. But a man can realize God if
he takes shelter under His Vidyā-māyā and follows the path of
righteousness. He who knows God and realizes Him is able to go beyond
māyā. He who firmly believes that God alone is the Doer and he himself a
mere instrument is a jivanmukta, a free soul though living in a body. I
said this to Keshab Chandra Sen.\"

GIRISH (to the doctor): \"How do you know that free will exists?\"

DOCTOR: \"Not by reasoning; I feel it.\"

GIRISH: \"In that case I may say that others and I feel the reverse. We
feel that we are controlled by another.\" (All laugh.)

**Dr. Sarkar on duty**

DOCTOR: \"There are two elements in duty: first, the \'oughtness\' of a
duty; second, the happiness, which comes as an after-effect. But at the
initial stage this happiness is not the impelling motive. I noticed in
my childhood the great worry of the priest at the sight of ants in the
sweets offered before the Deity. He did not, at the outset, feel joy at
the thought of the sweets. First of all he worried about them.\"

M. (to himself) : \"It is difficult to say whether one feels happiness
while performing the duty or afterwards. Where is the free will of a man
if he performs an action, being impelled by a feeling of happiness?\"

**Pure love**

MASTER: \"What the doctor is speaking of is called love without any
selfish motive. I do not want anything from Dr. Mahendra Sarkar; I do
not need anything from him, but still I love to see him. This is love
for love\'s sake. But suppose I get a little joy from it; how can I help
it?

\"Ahalyā once said to Rāma \'O Rāma, I have no objection to being born
even as a pig. But please grant that I may have pure love for Thy Lotus
Feet. I do not want anything else.\'

\"Nārada went to Ayodhya to remind Rāma that He was to kill Ravana . At
the sight of Rāma and Sita, he began to sing their glories. Gratified at
Nārada\'s devotion, Rāma said: \'Nārada, I am pleased with your prayer.
Ask a boon.\' Nārada replied, \'O Rāma, if Thou must give me a boon,
then grant that I may have pure love for Thy Lotus Feet and that I may
not be deluded by Thy world-bewitching māyā. Rāma said, \'Ask something
more.\' \'No, Rāma,\' answered Nārada, \'I do not want anything else. I
want only pure love for Thy Lotus Feet, a love that seeks no return.\'

\"That is Dr. Sarkar\'s attitude. It is like seeking God alone, and not
asking Him for wealth, fame, bodily comforts, or anything else. This is
called pure love.

\"There is an element of joy in it, no doubt; but it is not a worldly
joy; it is the joy of bhakti and prema, devotion to God and ecstatic
love of Him. I used to go to Sambhu Mallick\'s house. Once he said to
me: \'You come here frequently. Yes, you come because you feel happy
talking with me.\' Yes, there is that element of happiness.

\"But there is a state higher than this. When a man attains It, he moves
about aimlessly, like a child. As the child goes along, perhaps he sees
a grasshopper and catches it. The man of that exalted mood, too, has no
definite aim.

(To the devotees) \"Don\'t you understand the doctor\'s inner feeling?
It is the prayer of a devotee to God for right purpose, that he may have
no inclination for evil things.

\"I too passed through that state. It is called Dāsya, the attitude of
the servant toward his master. I used to weep so bitterly with the name
of the Divine Mother on my lips that people would stand in a row
watching me. When I was passing through that state, someone, in order to
test me and also to cure my madness, brought a prostitute into my room.
She was beautiful to look at, with pretty eyes. I cried, \'O Mother! O
Mother!\' and rushed out of the room. I ran to Haladhāri and said to
him, \'Brother, come and see who has entered my room!\' I told Haladhāri
and everyone else about this woman. While in that state I used to weep
with the name of the Mother on my lips. Weeping, I said to Her: O
Mother, protect me! Please make me stainless. Please see that my mind is
not diverted from the Real to the unreal.\' (To the doctor) This
attitude of yours is also very good. It is the attitude of a devotee,
one who looks on God as his Master.

\"When a man develops pure sattva, he thinks only of God. He does not
enjoy anything else. Some are born with pure sattva as a result of their
*Prārabdha* karma. Through unselfish action one finally acquires pure
sattva. Sattva mixed with rajas diverts the mind to various objects.
From it springs the conceit of doing good to the world. To do good to
the world is extremely difficult for such an insignificant creature as
man. But there is no harm in doing good to others in an unselfish
spirit. This is called unselfish action. It is highly beneficial for a
person to try to perform such action. But by no means all succeed, for
it is very difficult. Everyone must work. Only one or two can renounce
action. Rarely do you find a man who has developed pure sattva. Through
disinterested action sattva mixed with rajas gradually turns into pure
sattva.

\"No sooner does a man develop pure sattva than he realizes God, through
His grace.

\"Ordinary people cannot understand pure sattva. Hem once said to me:
\'Well, priest! The goal of a man\'s life is to acquire name and fame in
the world. Isn\'t that true?\' \"

**Tuesday, October 27, 1885**

Sri Ramakrishna was seated in his room. Narendra and other devotees were
with him. The Master was conversing with them. It was about ten o\'clock
in the morning.

NARENDRA \"How strangely the doctor behaved yesterday!\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Yes, the fish swallowed the hook but the line broke.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"But the hook is in its mouth. It will die and float
on the water.\"

Narendra went out for a few minutes. Sri Ramakrishna was talking to M
about Purna.

MASTER; \"The devotee looking on himself as Prakriti likes to embrace
and kiss God, whom he regards as the Purusha. I am telling this just to
you. Ordinary people should not hear these things.\"

1.  \"God sports in various ways. Even this illness of ours is one of
    His sports. Because you are ill new devotees are coming to you.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Bhupati says, \'What would people have thought of
you if you had just rented a house to live in, without being ill?\'
Well, what has happened to the doctor?\"

1.  \"As regards God! he accepts for himself the attitude of a servant.
    He says, \'Thou art the Master and I am Thy servant.\' But then he
    asks me, \'Why do you apply the idea of God to a man?\' \"

MASTER: \"Just see! Are you going to him today?\"

M: \"I shall see him if it is necessary to report your condition.\"

MASTER: \"How do you find this boy Bankim? If he cannot come here you
may give him instruction. That will awaken his spiritual
consciousness.\"

**Narendra\'s poverty**

Narendra entered the room and sat near Sri Ramakrishna. Since the death
of his father he had been very much worried about the family\'s
financial condition. He now had to support his mother and brothers.
Besides, he was preparing himself for his law examination. Lately he had
served as a teacher in the Vidyāsāgar School at Bowbazar. He wanted to
make some arrangement for his family and thus get rid of all his
worries. Sri Ramakrishna knew all this. He looked affectionately at
Narendra.

MASTER (to M.): \"Well, I said to Keshab, \'One should be satisfied with
what comes unsought.\' The son of an aristocrat does not worry about his
food and drink. He gets his monthly allowance. Narendra, too, belongs to
a high plane. Then why is he in such straitened circumstances? God
certainly provides everything for the man who totally surrenders himself
to Him.\"

M: \"Narendra, too, will be provided for. It is not yet too late for
him.\"

MASTER: \"But a man who feels intense renunciation within doesn\'t
calculate that way. He doesn\'t say to himself, \'I shall first make an
arrangement for the family and then practise *sādhanā*.\' No, he
doesn\'t feel that way if he has developed intense dispassion. A goswami
said in the course of his preaching, \'If a man has ten thousand rupees
he can maintain himself on the income; then, free from worries, he Can
pray to God.\'

\"Keshab Sen also said something like that. He said to me: \'Sir,
suppose a man wants, first of all, to make a suitable arrangement of his
property and estate and then think of God; will It be all right for him
to do so? Is there anything wrong about it?\' I said to him: \'When a
man feels utter dispassion, he looks on the world as a deep well and his
relatives as venomous cobras. Then he cannot think of saving money or
making arrangements about his property.\' God alone is real and all else
illusory. To think of the world instead of God!

\"A woman was stricken with intense grief. She first tied her nose-ring
in the corner of her cloth and then dropped to the ground, saying, \'Oh,
friends, what a calamity has befallen me!\' But she was very careful not
to break the nose-ring.\"

All laughed. At these words Narendra felt as if struck by an arrow, and
lay down on the floor. M. understood what was going through Narendra\'s
mind and said with a smile: \"What\'s the matter? Why are you lying
down?\"

The Master said to M., with a smile: \"You remind me of a woman who felt
ashamed of herself for sleeping with her brother-in-law and couldn\'t
understand the conduct of those women who lived as mistresses of
strangers. By way of excusing herself she said: \'After all, a
brother-in-law is one\'s own. But even that kills me with shame. And how
do these women dare to live with strangers?\' \"

M. himself had been leading a worldly life. Instead of being ashamed of
his own conduct, he smiled at Narendra. That was why Sri Ramakrishna
referred to the woman who criticized the conduct of immoral women,
though she herself had illicit love for her brother-in-law.

A Vaishnava minstrel was singing downstairs. Sri Ramakrishna was pleased
with his song and said that someone should give him a little money. A
devotee went downstairs. The Master asked, \"How much did he give the
singer?\" When he was told that the devotee had given only two pice, he
said: \"Just that much? This money is the fruit of his servitude. How
much he had to flatter his master and suffer to earn it! I thought he
would give at least four *ānnās*.\"

The younger Naren had promised to show Sri Ramakrishna the nature of
electricity with an instrument. The instrument was exhibited.

It was about two o\'clock. Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees were sitting
in the room. Atul brought with him a friend who was a munsiff. Bagchi,
the famous painter from Shikadarpara, arrived. He presented the Master
with several paintings. Sri Ramakrishna examined the pictures with great
delight.

Bagchi had long hair like a woman\'s. Sri Ramakrishna said: \"Many days
ago a sannyāsi came to Dakshineswar who had hair nine cubits long. He
used to chant the name of Radha. He was genuine.\"

**Master in samādhi & Narendra\'s singing**

A few minutes later Narendra began to sing. The songs were full of the
spirit of renunciation. He sang:

> *O Lord, must all my days pass by so utterly in vain? Down the path of
> hope I gaze with longing, day and night\...*

He sang again:

> *O Mother, Thou my inner Guide, ever awake within my heart;*
>
> *Day and night Thou holdest me in Thy lap.*
>
> *Why dost Thou show such tenderness to this unworthy child of Thine? .
> . .*

Then he sang:

> *O gracious Lord, if like a bee*
>
> *My soul cannot imbed itself*
>
> *Deep in the Lotus of Thy Feet,*
>
> *What comfort can I find in life?*
>
> *What can I gain with wealth untold,*
>
> *Neglecting Thee, supremest Wealth?*
>
> *I take no pleasure in the sight*
>
> *Of the most lovely infant\'s face,*
>
> *If all its loveliness reveals*
>
> *No trace of Thy dear features there.*
>
> *Moonlight is meaningless to me*
>
> *As darkest night, if Thy love\'s moon*
>
> *Rise not in my sours firmament.*
>
> *The purest wife\'s unspotted love*
>
> *Is stained, if in it is not set*
>
> *The priceless gem of love divine.*
>
> *O Lord, whenever doubt of Thee,*
>
> *Born of base error and neglect,*
>
> *Assails my mind, I writhe in pain*
>
> *As from a serpent\'s poisonous fangs!*
>
> *What more, O Master, shall I say?*
>
> *Thou art my heart\'s most precious Jewel,*
>
> *The Home of Everlasting Joy.*

It was half past five in the afternoon when Dr. Sarkar came to the
Master\'s room at Syampukur, felt his pulse, and prescribed the
necessary medicine. Many devotees were present, including Narendra,
Girish, Dr. Dukari, the younger Naren, Rākhāl , M., Sarat, and Shyam
Basu.

Dr. Sarkar talked a little about the Master\'s illness and watched him
take the first dose of medicine. Then Sri Ramakrishna began to talk to
Shyam Basu. Dr. Sarkar started to leave, saying, \"Now that you are
talking to Shyam Basu, I shall say good-bye to you.\"

The Master and a devotee asked the doctor if he would like to hear some
songs.

DR. SARKAR (to the Master): \"I should like it very much. But music
makes you frisk about like a kid and cut all sorts of capers. You must
suppress your emotion.\"

Dr. Sarkar took his seat once more, and Narendra began to sing in his
sweet voice, to the accompaniment of the Tānpura and Mridanga:

> *This universe, wondrous and infinite,*
>
> *O Lord, is Thy handiwork;*
>
> *And the whole world is a treasure-house*
>
> *Full of Thy beauty and grace. . .*

He sang again:

> *In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles;*
>
> *Therefore the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave.*
>
> *In the lap of boundless dark, on Mahanirvanas waves upborne,*
>
> *Peace flows serene and inexhaustible.*
>
> *Taking the form of the Void, in the robe of darkness wrapped,*
>
> *Who art Thou, Mother, seated alone in the shrine of samādhi?*
>
> *From the Lotus of Thy fear-scattering Feet flash Thy love\'s
> lightnings;*
>
> *Thy Spirit-Face shines forth with laughter terrible and loud!*

Dr. Sarkar said to M., \"This song is dangerous for him.\" Sri
Ramakrishna asked M. what the doctor had said. M. replied, \"The doctor
is afraid that this song may throw your mind into samādhi.\"

In the mean time the Master had partially lost consciousness of the
outer world. Looking at the physician, he said with folded hands: \"No,
no. Why should I go into samādhi?\" Hardly had he spoken these words
when he went into a deep ecstasy. His body became motionless, his eyes
fixed, his tongue speechless. He sat there like a statue cut in stone,
completely unconscious of the outer world. Turned inward were his mind,
ego, and all the other organs of perception. He seemed an altogether
different person.

Narendra continued his songs, pouring his entire heart and soul into
them:

> *What matchless beauty! What a bewitching Face I behold!*
>
> *The Sovereign of my soul has entered my lowly hut;*
>
> *The springs of my love are welling forth on every side.*
>
> *Tell me, my Beloved! O Thou, the Lord of my heart!*
>
> *What treasure shall I lay before Thy Lotus Feet?*
>
> *Take Thou my life, my soul; what more can I offer Thee?*
>
> *Take everything that is mine. Deign to accept my all.*

Narendra continued:

> *O gracious Lord, if like a bee*
>
> *My soul cannot imbed itself*
>
> *Deep in the Lotus of Thy Feet,*
>
> *What comfort can I find in life? . . .*

As the doctor heard the words, *\"The purest wife\'s unspotted love\",*
his eyes were filled with tears. He cried out, \"Ah me! Ah me!\"

Narendra sang again:

> *Oh, when will dawn the blessed day*
>
> *When Love will waken in my heart?*
>
> *When will my tears flow uncontrolled*
>
> *As I repeat Lord Hari\'s name,*
>
> *And all my longing be fulfilled? . . .*

In the midst of the singing Sri Ramakrishna had regained consciousness
of the outer world. When Narendra finished the song, the Master
continued his conversation, keeping them all spellbound. The devotees
looked at his face in wonder. It did not show the slightest trace of the
agonizing pain of his illness. The face shone with heavenly joy.

Addressing the doctor, the Master said: \"Give up this false modesty.
Why should you feel shy about singing the

name of God? The proverb says very truly: \'One cannot realize God if
one is a victim of shame, hatred, or fear.\' Give up such foolish
notions as: \'I am such a great man! Shall I dance crying the name of
God? What will other great men think of me on hearing of this? They may
say that the doctor, poor fellow, has been dancing uttering the name of
Hari, and thus pity me.\' Give up all these foolish notions.\"

DOCTOR: \"I never bother about what people say. I don\'t care a straw
about their opinions.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, I know of your strong feeling about that. (All laugh.)

**On knowledge and ignorance**

\"Go beyond knowledge and ignorance; only then can you realize God. To
know many things is ignorance. Pride of scholarship is also ignorance.
The unwavering conviction that God alone dwells in all beings is Jnāna,
knowledge. To know Him intimately is vijnāna, a richer Knowledge if a
thorn gets into your foot, a second thorn is needed to take it out. When
it is out both thorns are thrown away. You have to procure the thorn of
knowledge to remove the thorn of ignorance; then you must set aside both
knowledge and ignorance. God is beyond both knowledge and ignorance.
Once Lakshmana said to Rāma, \'Brother, how amazing it is that such a
wise man as Vasishtha wept bitterly at the death of his sons!\' Rāma
said: \'Brother, he who has knowledge must also have ignorance. He who
has knowledge of one thing must also have knowledge of many things. He
who is aware of light is also aware of darkness.\' Brahman is beyond
knowledge and ignorance, virtue and vice, merit and demerit, cleanliness
and uncleanliness.\"

Sri Ramakrishna then recited the following song of Ramprasad:

> *Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to Kāli, the Wish-fulfilling
> Tree,*
>
> *And there beneath it gather the four fruits of life.*
>
> *When will you learn to lie, O mind, in the abode of Blessedness,*
>
> *With Cleanliness and Defilement on either side of you?*
>
> *Only when you have found the way*
>
> *To keep your wives contentedly under a single roof,*
>
> *Will you behold the matchless form of Mother Syama. . . .*

SHYAM BASU: \"Sir, what remains after one throws away both thorns?\"

**Brahman cannot be described**

MASTER: \"*Nitya--Śuddha--Buddha rupam,* the Eternal and Ever-pure
Consciousness. How can I make it clear to you? Suppose a man who has
never tasted ghee asks you, \'What does ghee taste like?\' Now, how can
you explain that to him? At the most you can say: \'What is ghee like?
It is just like ghee!\' A young girl asked her friend: \'Well, friend,
your husband is here. What sort of pleasure do you enjoy with him?\' The
friend answered: \'My dear, you will know it for yourself when you get a
husband. How can I explain it to you?\'

\"It is said in the Purana that Bhagavati, the Divine Mother, was once
born as the daughter of King Himalaya. After Her birth She showed Her
father Her many forms. The Lord of the mountains, after enjoying all
these visions, said to the Divine Mother, \'May I have the vision of
Brahman as It is described in the Vedas!\' Then the Divine Mother
answered, \'Father, if you want to have the vision of Brahman you must
live in the company of holy men.\'

\"What Brahman is cannot be described in words. Somebody once said that
everything in the world has been made impure, like food that has touched
the tongue, and that Brahman alone remains undefiled. The meaning is
this: All scriptures and holy books-the Vedas, the Puranas, the Tantras,
and so forth-may be said to have been defiled because their contents
have been uttered by the tongues of men; but what Brahman is no tongue
has yet been able to describe. Therefore Brahman is still undefiled. One
cannot describe in words the joy of play and communion with
Satchidananda. He alone knows, who has realized it.\"

**Egotism condemned**

Addressing Dr. Sarkar, Sri Ramakrishna continued: \"Look here. One
cannot attain Knowledge unless one is free from egotism. There is a
saying:

> *When shall I be free?*
>
> *When \'I\' shall cease to be.*

\'I\' and \'mine\'-that is ignorance. \'Thou\' and Thine\' that is
Knowledge. A true devotee says: \'O God, Thou alone art the Doer; Thou
alone doest all. I am a mere instrument; I do as Thou makest me do. All
these-wealth, possessions, nay, the universe Itself-belong to Thee. This
house and these relatives are Thine alone, not mine. I am Thy servant;
mine is only the right to serve Thee according to Thy bidding.\'

\"Those who have read a few books cannot get rid of conceit. Once I had
a talk with Kalikrishna Tagore about God. At once he said, \'I know all
about that.\' I said to him: \'Does a man who has visited Delhi brag
about it? Does a gentleman go about telling everyone that he is a
gentleman?\' \"

SHYAM: \"But Kalikrishna Tagore has great respect for you.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, how vanity turns a person\'s head! There was a scavenger
woman in the temple garden at Dakshineswar. And her pride! And all
because of a few ornaments. One day a few men were passing her on the
path and she shouted to them, \'Hey! Get out of the way, you people!\'
If a scavenger woman could talk that way, what can one say about the
vanity of others?\"

**Master scolds Shyam Basu**

SHYAM: \"Sir, if God alone does everything, how is it that man is
punished for his sins?\"

MASTER: \"How like a goldsmith you talk!\"

NARENDRA: \"In other words, Shyam Babu has a calculating mind, like a
goldsmith, who weighs things with his delicate balance.\"

MASTER: \"I say: O my foolish boy, eat the mangoes and be happy. What is
the use of your calculating how many hundreds of trees, how many
thousands of branches, and how many millions of leaves there are in the
orchard? You have come to the orchard to eat mangoes. Eat them and be
contented.

(To Shyam) \"You have been born in this world as a human being to
worship God; therefore try to acquire love for His Lotus Feet. Why do
you trouble yourself to know a hundred other things? What will you gain
by discussing \'philosophy\'? Look here, one ounce of Liquor is enough
to intoxicate you. What is the use of your trying to find out how many
gallons of liquor there are in the tavern?\"

DOCTOR: \"Quite so. And what is more, the Wine in God\'s Tavern is
beyond all measure. There is no limit to It.\"

MASTER (to Shyam): \"Why don\'t you give your power of attorney to God?
Rest all your responsibilities on Him. If you entrust an honest man with
your responsibilities, will he misuse his power over you? God alone
knows whether or not He will punish you for your sins.\"

DOCTOR: \"God alone knows what is in His mind. How can a man guess it?
God is beyond all our calculations.\"

MASTER (to Shyam): \"That\'s the one theme of you Calcutta people. You
all say, \'God is stained by the evil of inequality\', because He has
made one person happy and another miserable. What these rascals see in
themselves they see in God, too.

\"Hem used to come to the temple garden at Dakshineswar. Whenever he
chanced to meet me, he would say: \'Well, priest, there is only one
thing worth having in this world, and that is honour. Isn\'t that so?\'
Very few indeed say that the goal of human life is the realization of
God.\"

SHYAM: \"We hear a great deal about the subtle body. Can anyone show it
to us? Can anyone demonstrate that the subtle body, when a man dies,
leaves the gross body and goes away?\"

MASTER: \"True devotees don\'t care a rap about showing you these
things. What do they care whether some fool of a big man respects them
or not? The desire to have a big man under their control never enters
their minds.\"

SHYAM: \"What is the distinction between the gross body and the subtle
body?\"

MASTER: \"The body consisting of the five gross elements is called the
gross body. The subtle body is made up of the mind, the ego, the
discriminating faculty, and the mind-stuff. There is also a causal body,
by means of which one enjoys the Bliss of God and holds communion with
Him. The Tantra calls it the Bhagavati Tanu, the Divine Body. Beyond all
these is the Maha-karana, the Great Cause. That cannot be expressed by
words.

\"What is the use of merely listening to words? Do something! What will
you achieve by merely repeating the word \'siddhi\'? Will that
intoxicate you? You will not be intoxicated even if you make a paste of
siddhi and rub it all over your body. You must eat some of it. How can a
man recognize yarns of different counts, such as number forty and number
forty-one, unless he is in the trade? Those who trade in yarn do not
find it at all difficult to describe a thread of a particular count.
Therefore I say, practice a little spiritual discipline; then you will
know all these-the gross, the subtle, the causal, and the Great Cause.
While praying to God, ask only for love for His Lotus Feet.

\"When Rāma redeemed Ahalyā from the curse, He said to her, \'Ask a boon
of Me.\' Ahalyā said, \'O Rāma, if You deign to grant me a boon, then
please fulfill my desire that I may always meditate on Your Lotus Feet,
even though I may be born in a pig\'s body.\'

**Master\'s prayer**

\"I prayed to the Divine Mother only for love. I offered flowers at Her
Lotus Feet and said with folded hands: \'O Mother, here is Thy ignorance
and here is Thy knowledge; take them both and give me only pure love for
Thee. Here is Thy holiness and here is Thy unholiness; take them both
and give me only pure love for Thee. Here is Thy virtue and here is Thy
sin; here is Thy good and here is Thy evil; take them all and give me
only pure love for Thee. Here is Thy dharma and here is Thy adharma;
take them both and give me only pure love for Thee.\'

**Pairs of opposites**

\"Dharma means good actions, like giving in charity. If you accept
dharma, you have to accept adharma too. If you accept virtue, you have
to accept sin. If you accept knowledge, you have to accept ignorance. If
you accept holiness, you have to accept unholiness. It is like a man\'s
being aware of light, in which case he is aware of darkness too. If a
man is aware of one, he is aware of many too. If he is aware of good, he
is aware of evil too.

\"Blessed is the man who retains his love for the Lotus Feet of God,
even though he eats pork. But if a man is attached to the world, even
though he lives only on boiled vegetables and cereals, then-\"

DOCTOR: \"He is a wretch. But let me interrupt you here and say
something. Buddha once ate pork and as a result had colic. To get rid of
the pain he would take opium and thus become unconscious. Do you know
the meaning of Nirvāna and such stuff? Buddha would become stupefied
after eating opium. He would have no consciousness of the outer world.
This is what they call Nirvāna!\"

All laughed to hear this novel interpretation of Nirvāna. The
conversation went on.

MASTER (to Shyam): \"There is no harm in your leading the life of a
householder. But do your duties in an unselfish spirit, fixing your mind
on the Lotus Feet of God. You must have noticed that a man with a
carbuncle on his back speaks to others in his usual way; perhaps he
attends to his daily duties also; but his mind is always on the
carbuncle. It is like that.

\"Live in the world like an immoral woman. Though she performs her
household duties, her mind is fixed on her sweetheart. (To the doctor)
Do you understand that?\"

DOCTOR: \"Never having had such an experience myself, how can I
understand?\"

SHYAM: \"Oh, yes! You understand a little.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER: \"Moreover he has had long experience in that trade. Isn\'t that
so?\" (All laugh.)

SHYAM: \"Sir, what do you think of Theosophy?\"

MASTER: \"The long and short of the matter is that those who go about
making disciples belong to a very inferior level. So also do those who
want occult powers to walk over the Ganges and to report what a person
says in a far-off country and so on. It is very hard for such people to
have pure love for God.\"

SHYAM: \"But the Theosophists have been trying to re-establish the Hindu
religion.\"

MASTER: \"I don\'t know much about them.\"

SHYAM: \"You can learn from Theosophy where the soul goes after
death-whether to the lunar sphere or the

stellar sphere or some other region.\"

MASTER: \"That may be. But let me tell you my own attitude. Once a man
asked Hanuman, \'What day of the lunar fortnight is it?\' Hanuman
replied: \'I know nothing about the day of the week, the day of the
lunar fortnight, the position of the stars in the sky, or any such
things. On Rāma alone I meditate.\' That is my attitude too.\"

SHYAM: \"The Theosophists believe in the existence of Mahatmas. Do you
believe in them, sir?\"

MASTER: \"If you believe in my words, I say yes. But now please leave
these matters alone. Come here again when I am a little better. Some way
will be found for you to attain peace of mind, if you have faith in me.
You must have noticed that I don\'t accept any gift of money or clothes.
We do not take any collection here. That is why so many people come.
(Laughter.)

(To the doctor) \"If you won\'t take offence, I shall tell you
something. It is this: You have had enough of such things as money,
honour, lecturing, and so on. Now for a few days direct your mind to
God. And come here now and then. Your spiritual feeling will be kindled
by hearing words about God.\"

After a little while, as the doctor stood up to take his leave, Girish
Chandra Ghosh entered the room and bowed low before the Master. Dr.
Sarkar was pleased to see him and took his seat again.

DOCTOR (pointing to Girish): \"Of course he would not come as long as I
was here. No sooner am I about to leave than he enters the room.\"

Girish and Dr. Sarkar began to talk about the Science Association
established by the latter.

MASTER: \"Will you take me there one day?\"

DOCTOR: \"If you go there you will lose all consciousness at the sight
of the wondrous works of God.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, indeed!\"

DOCTOR (to Ginsh): \"Whatever you may do, please do not worship him as
God. You are turning the head of this good man.\"

GIRISH: \"\'What else can I do? Oh, how else shall I regard a person who
has taken me across this ocean of the world, and what is still more, the
ocean of doubt? There is nothing in him that I do not hold sacred. Can I
ever look on even his excreta as filthy?\"

DOCTOR: \'This question of excreta doesn\'t bother me. I too have no
feeling of repugnance. Once a grocer\'s child was brought to my office
for treatment. His bowels moved there. All covered their noses with
cloths; but I sat by his side for half an hour without putting a
handkerchief to my nose. Besides, I cannot cover my nose when the
scavenger passes by me with a tub on his head. No, I cannot do that. I
know very well that there is no difference between a scavenger and
myself. Why should I look down on him? Can\'t I take the dust of his
\[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\'s\] feet? Look here,\"

The doctor saluted Sri Ramakrishna and touched the Master\'s feet with
his forehead.

GIRISH: \"Oh, the angels are saying, \'Blessed, blessed be this
auspicious moment!\' \"

DOCTOR: \"What is there to marvel at in taking the dust of a man\'s
feet? I can take the dust of everybody\'s feet. Give me, all of you, the
dust of your feet.\"

The doctor touched the feet of all the devotees.

NARENDRA (to the doctor): \"We think of him \[meaning the Master\] as a
person who is like God. Do you know, sir, what it is like? There is a
point between the vegetable creation and the animal creation where it is
very difficult to determine whether a particular thing is a vegetable or
an animal. Likewise, there is a stage between the man-world and the
God-world where it is extremely hard to say whether a person is a man or
God.\"

DOCTOR: \"Well, my dear young friend, one cannot apply analogies to
things divine.\"

NARENDRA: \"I don\'t say that he is God. What I am saying is that he is
a godlike man.\"

**Dr. Sarkar on expressing feelings**

DOCTOR: \"One should suppress one\'s feelings in such a matter. It is
bad to give vent to them. Alas! No one understands my own feelings. Even
my best friend thinks of me as a stern and cruel person. Even people
like you will perhaps one day throw me out after beating me with your
shoes.\"

MASTER: \"Don\'t say such a thing! They love you so much! They await
your coming as eagerly as the bridesmaids in the bridal chamber await
the coming of the groom.\"

GIRISH: \"Everyone has the greatest respect for you.\"

DOCTOR: \"My son and even my wife think of me as a hard-hearted person.
My only crime is that I do not display my feelings.\"

GIRISH: \"In that case, sir, it would be wise for you to open the door
of your heart, at least out of pity for your friends; for you see that
your friends cannot otherwise understand you.\"

DOCTOR: \"Will you believe me when I say that my feelings get worked up
even more than yours? (To Narendra) I shed tears in solitude.

(To Sri Ramakrishna) \"Well, may I say something? When you are in
ecstasy you place your foot on others\' bodies. That is not good.\"

MASTER: \"Do you think I know at that time that I am touching another
with my foot?\"

DOCTOR: \"You feel that it is not the right thing to do, don\'t you?\"

MASTER: \"How can I explain to you what I experience in samādhi? After
coming down from that state I think, sometimes, that my illness may be
due to samādhi. The thing is, the thought of God makes me mad. All this
is the result of my divine madness. How can I help it?\"

DOCTOR: \"Now he accepts my view. He expresses regret for what he does.
He is conscious that the act is sinful\"

MASTER (to Narendra): \"You are very clever. Why don\'t you answer?
Explain it all to the doctor.\"

**Cause of Master\'s illness**

GIRISH (to the doctor): \"Sir, you are mistaken. He is not expressing
regret for touching the bodies of his devotees during samādhi. His own
body is pure, untouched by any sin. That he touches others in this way
is for their good. Sometimes he thinks that he may have got this illness
by taking their sins upon himself.

\"Think of your own case. Once you suffered from colic. Didn\'t you have
regrets at that time for sitting up and reading till very late at night?
Does that prove that reading till the late hours of the night is, in
itself, a bad thing? He \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\] too may be sorry
that he is ill. But that does not make him feel that it is wrong on his
part to touch others for their welfare.\"

Dr. Sarkar felt rather embarrassed and said to Girish: \"I confess my
defeat at your hands. Give me the dust of

your feet.\" He saluted Girish.

DOCTOR (to Narendra): \"Whatever else one may say about him \[meaning
Girish\], one must admit his intellectual powers.\"

NARENDRA (to the doctor): \"You may look at the thing from another
standpoint. You can devote your life to scientific research without
giving a thought to your health or comfort. But the Science of God is
the grandest of all sciences. Isn\'t it natural for him to risk his
health to realize Him?\"

DOCTOR: \"All religious reformers, including Jesus, Chaitanya, Buddha,
and Mohammed, were in the end filled with egotism. They all said,
\'Whatever I say is alone true.\' How shocking!\" GIRISH (to the
doctor): \"Now, sir, you are committing the same mistake.

You are accusing them all of egotism. You are finding fault with them.
For that very reason you too can be accused of egotism.\"

Dr. Sarkar remained silent.

NARENDRA (to the doctor): \"We offer worship to him bordering on divine
worship.\"

At these words the Master laughed like a child.

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 48**

IN THE COMPANY OF DEVOTEES AT SYAMPUKUR

> Thursday, October 29, 1885

**M. and Dr. Sarkar**

IT WAS ABOUT TEN O\'CLOCK in the morning when M. arrived at Dr.
Sarkar\'s house in Sankharitola, Calcutta, to report Sri Ramakrishna\'s
condition. M. and Dr. Sarkar became engaged in conversation.

DOCTOR: \"You see, Dr. Behari Bhaduri always harps on the same thing. He
says that Goethe\'s spirit came out of his body and that Goethe himself
saw it. It must have been very amazing.\"

**The aim of human life**

1.  \"As Sri Ramakrishna says, what shall we gain from these
    discussions? We have been born in this world in order to cultivate
    devotion to the Lotus Feet of God. He tells us the story of a man
    who entered an orchard to eat mangoes. But instead of eating the
    fruit, he took out pencil and paper and began to jot down the number
    of trees, branches, and leaves in the orchard. A servant saw him and
    asked: \'What are you doing? Why have you come here?\' The man said:
    \'I have come here to eat mangoes. I am now counting the trees,
    branches, and leaves in the orchard.\' Thereupon the servant
    replied: \'If you have come here to eat mangoes, then enjoy them.
    What will you gain by counting the trees, branches, and leaves?\' \"

DOCTOR: \"I see that the Paramahamsa has been able to extract the
essence.\"

Then Dr. Sarkar told M. many stories about his homeopathic hospital. He
showed M. the list of the patients who visited the hospital every day.
He further remarked that at the beginning many medical practitioners had
discouraged him about homeopathy and had even written against him in
magazines.

M. and Dr. Sarkar got into the doctor\'s carriage. The doctor visited
many patients. He entered a house of the Tagore family at Pathuriaghata
and was detained there by the head of the family. Returning to the
carriage, he began to talk to M.

DOCTOR: \"I was talking to that gentleman about the Paramahamsa. We also
talked about Theosophy and Colonel Olcott. The Paramahamsa is angry with
the gentleman. Do you know why? Because he says he knows everything.\"

1.  \"No, why should the Master be angry? I heard that they once met
    each other. Paramahamsadeva was talking about God. The gentleman
    said, \'Oh, yes! I know all that!\'

DOCTOR: \"He has donated thirty-two thousand five hundred rupees to the
Science Association.\"

They drove on, talking about Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness and the care
that should be taken of him.

DOCTOR: \"Do you intend to send him back to Dakshineswar?\"

1.  \"No, sir. That would greatly inconvenience the devotees. They can
    always visit him if he is in Calcutta.\" DOCTOR: \"But it is very
    expensive here.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"The devotees don\'t mind that. All they want is to be able to
    serve him. As regards the expense, it must be borne whether he lives
    in Calcutta or at Dakshineswar. But if he goes back to Dakshineswar,
    the devotees won\'t always be able to visit him, and that will cause
    them great worry.\"

**Dr. Bhaduri and Dr. Sarkar**

Dr. Sarkar and M. arrived at Syampukur and found the Master sitting with
the devotees in his room. Dr.

Bhaduri also was there.

Dr. Sarkar examined the Master\'s pulse and inquired about his
condition. The conversation turned to God.

DR. BHADURI: \"Shall I tell you the truth? All this is unreal, like a
dream.\"

**Is the world a delusion?**

DR. SARKAR: \"Is everything delusion? Then whose is this delusion? And
why this delusion? If all know it to be delusion, then why do they talk?
I cannot believe that God is real and His creation unreal\"

MASTER: \"That is a good attitude. It is good to look on God as the
Master and oneself as His servant. As long as a man feels the body to be
real, as long as he is conscious of \'I\' and \'you\', it is good to
keep the relationship of master and servant; it is not good to cherish
the idea of \'I am He\'.

\"Let me tell you something else. You see the same room whether you look
at it from one side or from the middle of the room.\"

DR. BHADURI (to Dr. Sarkar): \"What I have just said you will find in
the Vedānta. You must study the scriptures. Then you will understand.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"Why so? Has he \[meaning the Master\] acquired all this
wisdom by studying the scriptures? He too supports my view. Can\'t one
be wise without reading the scriptures?\"

MASTER: \"But how many scriptures I have heard!\"

DR. SARKAR: \"A man may mistake the meaning if he only hears. In your
case it is not mere hearing.\"

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): \"I understand that you spoke of me as insane.
That is why they (pointing to M. and the others) don\'t want to go to
you.\"

DR. SARKAR (looking at M.): \"Why Should I call you \[meaning the
Master\] insane? But I mentioned your egotism. Why do you allow people
to take the dust of your feet?\"

M: \"Otherwise they weep.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"That is their mistake. They should be told about it.\"

1.  \"Why should you object to their taking the dust of his feet?
    Doesn\'t God dwell in all beings?\" DR. SARKAR: \"I don\'t object to
    that. Then you must take the dust of everyone\'s feet.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"But there is a greater manifestation of God in some men than in
    others. There is water everywhere; but you see more of it in a lake,
    a river, or an ocean. Will you show the same respect to a new
    Bachelor of Science as you do to Faraday?\"

DR. SARKAR: \"I agree with that. But why do you call him God?\"

1.  \"Why do we salute each other? It is because God dwells in
    everybody\'s heart. You haven\'t given much thought to this
    subject.\"

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): \"I have already told you that some people
reveal more of God than others. Earth reflects the sun\'s rays in one
way, a tree in another way, and a mirror in still another way. You see a
better reflection in a mirror than in other objects. Don\'t you see that
these devotees here are not on the same level with Prahlada and others
of his kind? Prahlada\'s whole heart and soul were dedicated to God.\"

Dr. Sarkar did not reply. All were silent.

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): \"You see, you have love for this \[meaning
himself\]. You told me that you loved me.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"You are a child of nature. That is why I tell you all
this. It hurts me to see people salute you by touching your feet. I say
to myself, \'They are spoiling such a good man.\' Keshab Sen, too, was
spoiled that way by his devotees. Listen to me-\"

**Master sharply reprimands Dr. Sarkar**

MASTER: \"Listen to you? You are greedy, lustful, and egotistic.\"

DR. BHADURI (to Dr. Sarkar): \"That is to say, you have the traits of a
jiva, an embodied being. These are his traits: lust, egotism, greed for
wealth, and a hankering after name and fame. All embodied beings have
these traits.\"

DR. SARKAR (to the Master): \"If you talk that way, I shall only examine
your throat and go away. Perhaps that is what you want. In that case we
should not talk about anything else. But if you want discussion, then I
shall say what I think to be right.\"

All remained silent.

After a while the Master became engaged in conversation with Dr.
Bhaduri.

**Paths of negation and affirmation**

MASTER: \"Let me tell you the truth. He \[meaning Dr. Sarkar\] is now
following the path of negation. Therefore he discriminates, following
the process of \'Neti, neti\', and reasons in this way: God is not the
living beings; He is not the universe; He is outside the creation. But
later he will follow the path of affirmation and accept everything as
the manifestation of God.

\"By taking off, one by one, the sheaths of a banana tree, one obtains
the pith. The sheaths are one thing, and the pith is another. The
sheaths are not the pith, and the pith is not the sheaths. But in the
end one realizes that the pith cannot exist apart from the sheaths, and
the sheaths cannot exist apart from the pith; they are part and parcel
of one and the same banana tree. Likewise, it is God who has become the
twenty-four cosmic principles; it is He who has become man.

**Three classes of devotees**

(To Dr. Sarkar) \"There are three kinds of devotees: superior, mediocre,
and inferior. The inferior devotee says, \'God is out there.\' According
to him God is different from His creation. The mediocre devotee says:
\'God is the Antaryami, the Inner Guide. God dwells in everyone\'s
heart. The mediocre devotee sees God in the heart. But the superior
devotee sees that God alone has become everything; He alone has become
the twenty-four cosmic principles. He finds that everything, above and
below, is filled with God.

\"Read the Gitā, the Bhagavata, and the Vedānta, and you will understand
all this. Is not God in His creation?\"

DR. SARKAR: \"Not in any particular object. He is everywhere. And
because He is everywhere, He cannot be sought after.\"

The conversation turned to other things. Sri Ramakrishna was always
experiencing ecstatic moods, which the doctor said might aggravate his
illness. Dr. Sarkar said to him: \"You must suppress your emotion. My
feelings, too, are greatly stirred up. I can dance much more than you.\"

THE YOUNGER NAREN (smiling): \"What would you do if your emotion
increased a little more?\"

DR. SARKAR: \"My power of control would also increase.\"

MASTER AND M: \"You may say that now!\"

M: \"Can you tell us what you would do if you went into an ecstatic
mood?\"

The conversation turned to money.

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): \"I don\'t think about it at all. You know that
very well, don\'t you? This is not a pretence.\"

**Absent-mindedness of worldly people**

DR. SARKAR: \"Even I have no desire for money-not to speak of yourself!
My cash-box lies open.\"

MASTER: \"Jadu Mallick, too, is absent-minded. When he takes his meals
he sometimes becomes so absent-minded that he doesn\'t know whether the
food is good or bad. When someone says to him, \'Don\'t eat that; it
doesn\'t taste good\', Jadu says: \'Eh? Is this food bad? Why, that\'s
so!\'\"

Was the Master hinting that there was an ocean of difference between
absent-mindedness due to the contemplation of God, and absent-mindedness
due to preoccupation with worldly thoughts?

Pointing to Dr. Sarkar, Sri Ramakrishna said to the devotees, with a
smile: \"When a thing is boiled, it becomes soft. At first he was very
hard. Now he is softening from inside.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"When a thing is boiled, it begins to soften from the
outside. I am afraid that won\'t happen to me in this birth.\" (All
laugh.) .

Dr. Sarkar was about to take his leave. He was talking to Sri
Ramakrishna.

DOCTOR: \"Can\'t you forbid people to salute you by touching your
feet?\"

MASTER: \"Can all comprehend the Indivisible Satchidananda?\"

DR. SARKAR: \"But shouldn\'t you tell people what is right?\"

**Different disciplines for different temperaments**

MASTER: \"People have different tastes. Besides, all have not the same
fitness for spiritual life.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"How is that?\"

MASTER: \"Don\'t you know what difference in taste is? Some enjoy fish
curry; some, fried fish; some, pickled fish; and again, some, the rich
dish of fish pilau. Then too, there is difference in fitness. I ask
people to learn to shoot at a banana tree first, then at the wick of a
lamp, and then at a flying bird.\"

It was dusk. Sri Ramakrishna became absorbed in contemplation of God.
For the time being he forgot all about his painful disease. Several
intimate disciples sat near him and looked at him intently. After a long
time he became aware of the outer world and said to M. in a whisper:
\"You see, my mind was completely merged in the Indivisible Brahman.
After that I saw many things. I found that the doctor will have
spiritual awakening. But it will take some time. I won\'t have to tell
him much. I saw another person while in that mood. My mind said to me,
\'Attract him too.\' I shall tell you about him later.\"

Shyam Basu, Dr. Dukari, and a few other devotees arrived. Sri
Ramakrishna talked to them.

SHYAM: \"Ah, what a fine thing you said to us the other day!\"

MASTER (smiling): \"What was that?\"

**Jnāna, ajnāna, and vijnāna**

SHYAM: \"What remains with a man when he goes beyond jnāna and ajnāna,
knowledge and ignorance.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"It is vijnāna, special Knowledge of God. To know
many things is ignorance. To know that

God dwells in all beings is knowledge. And what is vijnāna? It is to
know God in a special manner, to converse with Him and feel Him to be
one\'s own relative.

\"To know that there is fire in wood is knowledge. But to make a fire
with that wood, cook food with that fire, and become healthy and strong
from that food is vijnāna.\"

SHYAM (smiling): \"And about the thorn?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes. When a thorn gets into the sole of your foot,
you procure a second thorn. After taking out the first thorn with the
help of the second, you throw both thorns away. Likewise, you should
procure the thorn of knowledge in order to remove the thorn of
ignorance. After destroying ignorance, you should discard both knowledge
and ignorance. Then you attain vijnāna.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was pleased with Shyam Basu. He was quite an elderly
person and wanted to devote his time to contemplation. This was his
second visit to the Master.

**Master\'s advice to Shyam Basu**

MASTER (to Shyam Basu): \"Give up worldly talk altogether. Don\'t talk
about anything whatever but God. If you see a worldly person coming near
you, leave the place before he arrives. You have spent your whole life
in the world. You have seen that it is all hollow. Isn\'t that so? God
alone is Substance, and all else is illusory. God alone is real, and all
else has only a two days existence. What is there in the world? The
world is like a pickled hog plum: one craves for it. But what is there
in a hog plum? Only skin and pit. And if you eat it you will have
colic.\"

SHYAM: \"Yes, sir. Everything you have said is true.\"

**Nature of the world**

MASTER: \"For many years you have devoted yourself to various worldly
things. You will not be able to think of God and meditate on Him in this
confusion of the world. A little solitude is necessary for you;
otherwise your mind will not be steady. Therefore you must fix a place
for meditation at least half a mile away from your house.\"

Shyam Basu remained silent a few moments. He appeared absorbed in
thought.

MASTER (Smiling): \"Besides, all your teeth are gone. Why should you
bother so much about the Durga Puja? (All laugh.) A man used to
celebrate the worship of Durga with the sacrifice of goats and with
other ceremonies. He continued the worship many years and then stopped
it. A friend asked him, \'Why don\'t you perform the Durga Puja any
more?\' \'Brother,\' replied the man, \'my teeth are all gone. I have
lost the power to chew goat-meat.\'\"

SHYAM: \"Ah! How sweet these words are!\"

MASTER (smiling): \"This world is a mixture of sand and sugar. Like the
ant, one should discard the sand and eat the sugar. He who can eat the
sugar is clever indeed. Build a quiet place for thinking of God-a place
for your meditation. Have it ready. I shall visit it.\"

SHYAM: \"Sir, is there such a thing as reincarnation? Shall we be born
again?\"

MASTER: \"Ask God about it. Pray to Him sincerely. He will tell you
everything. Speak to Jadu Mallick, and he himself will tell you how many
houses he has, and how many government bonds. It is not right to try to
know these things at the beginning. First of all realize God; then He
Himself will let you know whatever you desire.\"

SHYAM: \"Sir, how much wrong, how many sinful things a man does in this
world! Can he ever realize God?\"

MASTER: \"If a man practises spiritual discipline before his death and
if he gives up his body praying to God

and meditating on Him, when will sin touch him? It is no doubt the
elephant\'s nature to smear his body with dust and mud, even after his
bath. But he cannot do so if the mahut takes him into the stable
immediately after his bath.\"

In spite of his serious illness the Master keenly felt the sorrow and
suffering of men. Day and night he thought about their welfare. The
devotees wondered at his compassion. The assurance of Sri Ramakrishna
that no sin can touch a man if he gives up his body while praying to God
was deeply impressed on their minds.

**Friday, October 30, 1885**

It was nine o\'clock in the morning. Sri Ramakrishna was talking with M.
in his room. No one else was present.

M. was going to Dr. Sarkar to report his condition and bring him to
examine the Master.

**Master on Purna and Manindra**

MASTER (to M., smiling): \"Purna came this morning. He has such a nice
nature! Manindra has an element of Prakriti, of womanliness. He has read
the life of Chaitanya and understood the attitude of the gopis. He has
also realized that God is Purusha and man is Prakriti, and that man
should worship God as His handmaid. How remarkable!\"

M: \"It is true, sir.\"

Purna was then fifteen or sixteen years old. Sri Ramakrishna always
longed to see him. But his relatives did not allow him to visit the
Master. One night, before his illness, Sri Ramakrishna had been so eager
to see Purna that he had suddenly left Dakshineswar and arrived at M.\'s
house in Calcutta. M. had brought Purna from his home to see Sri
Ramakrishna. The Master had given the boy many instructions about prayer
and had afterwards returned to Dakshineswar. Manindra was about the same
age as Purna. The devotees addressed him as \"khoka\". He used to dance
in ecstasy when he heard the chanting of God\'s name.

About half past ten M. arrived at Dr. Sarkar\'s house. He went up to the
second floor and sat in a chair on the porch adjacent to the
drawing-room. In front of Dr. Sarkar was a glass bowl in which some
goldfish were kept. Now and then Dr. Sarkar threw some cardamom shells
into the bowl. Again, he threw pellets of flour to the sparrows. M.
watched him.

**Dr. Sarkar on bhakti and jnāna**

DOCTOR (smiling, to M.): \"You see, these goldfish are staring at me
like devotees staring at God. They haven\'t noticed the food I have
thrown into the water. Therefore I say, what will you gain by mere
bhakti? You need knowledge too. (M. smiles.) Look there at the sparrows!
They flew away when I threw flour pellets to them. They were frightened.
They have no bhakti because they are without knowledge. They don\'t know
that flour is their food.\"

Dr. Sarkar and M. entered the drawing-room. There were shelves all
around filled with books. The doctor rested a little. M. looked at the
books. He picked up Canon Farrar\'s Life of Jesus and read a few pages.
Dr. Sarkar told M. how the first homeopathic hospital was started in the
teeth of great opposition. He asked M. to read the letters relating to
it, which had been published in the \"Calcutta Journal of Medicine\" in
1876. Dr. Sarkar was much devoted to homeopathy.

M. picked up another book, Munger\'s New Theology. Dr. Sarkar noticed
it.

**Dr. Sarkar on faith**

DOCTOR: \"Munger has based his conclusions on nice argument and
reasoning. It is not like your believing a thing simply because a
Chaitanya or a Buddha or Jesus Christ has said so.\"

M. (smiling): \"Yes, we should not believe Chaitanya or Buddha; but we
must believe Munger!\"

DOCTOR: \"Whatever you say.\"

M: \"We must quote someone as our authority; so it is Munger.\" (The
doctor smiles.)

Dr. Sarkar got into his carriage accompanied by M. The carriage
proceeded toward Syampukur. It was midday. They gossiped together. The
conversation turned to Dr. Bhaduri, who had also been visiting the
Master now and then.

M. (smiling): \"Bhaduri said about you that you must begin all over
again from the stone and brick-bat.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"How is that?\"

1.  \"Because you don\'t believe in the Mahatmas, astral bodies, and so
    forth. Perhaps Bhaduri is a Theosophist. Further, you don\'t believe
    in the Incarnation of God. That is why he teased you, saying that
    when, you died this time you would certainly not be reborn as a
    human being. That would be far off. You wouldn\'t be born even as an
    animal or bird, or even as a tree or a plant. You would have to
    begin all over again, from stone and brick-bat. Then, after many,
    many births, you might assume a human body.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"Goodness gracious!\"

1.  \"Bhaduri further said that the knowledge of your physical science
    was a false knowledge. Such knowledge is momentary. He gave an
    analogy. Suppose there are two wells. The one gets its water from an
    underground spring. The other has no such spring and is filled with
    rain-water. But the water of the second well does not last a long
    time. The knowledge of your science is like the rain-water. It dries
    up.\"

DR. SARKAR (with a smile): \"I see!\"

The carriage arrived at Cornwallis Street. Dr. Sarkar picked up Dr.
Pratap Mazumdar. Pratap had visited Sri Ramakrishna the previous day.
They soon arrived at Syampukur .

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room, on the second floor, with
several devotees.

DR. SARKAR (to the Master): \"I see you are coughing. (Smiling) But it
is good to go to Kasi.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): \"But that will give me liberation. I don\'t want
liberation; I want love of God!\" (All laugh.)

Pratap was Dr. Bhaduri\'s son-in-law. Sri Ramakrishna was speaking to
Pratap in praise of his father-in-law.

MASTER (to Pratap): \"Ah, what a grand person he has become! He
contemplates God and observes purity in his conduct. Further, he accepts
both aspects of God-personal and impersonal.\"

M. was very eager to mention Dr. Bhaduri\'s remarks about Dr. Sarkar\'s
being born again as a stone or brick-bat. He asked the younger Naren
very softly whether he remembered those remarks of Dr. Bhaduri. Sri
Ramakrishna overheard this.

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): \"Do you know what Dr. Bhaduri said about you?
He said that, because you didn\'t believe these things, in the next
cycle you would have to begin your earthly life from a stone or
brick-bat.\" (All laugh.)

DR. SARKAR (smiling): \"Suppose I begin from a stone or brick-bat, and
after many births obtain a human body; but as soon as I come back to
this place I shall have to begin over again from a stone or brick-bat.\"
(The doctor and all laugh.)

The conversation turned to the Master\'s ecstasy in spite of his
illness.

PRATAP: \"Yesterday I saw you in an ecstatic mood.\"

MASTER: \"It happened of itself; but it was not intense.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"Ecstasy and talking are not good for you now.\"

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): \"I saw you yesterday in my samādhi. I found
that you are a mine of knowledge; but it is all dry knowledge. You have
not tasted divine bliss. (To Pratap, referring to Dr. Sarkar) If he ever
tastes divine bliss, he will see everything, above and below, filled
with it. Then he will not say that whatever he says is right and what
others say is wrong. Then he will not utter sharp, strong, pointed
words.\"

The devotees remained silent.

**Advice to Dr. Sarkar**

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna went into a spiritual mood and said to Dr.
Sarkar: \"Mahindra Babu, what is this madness of yours about money? Why
such attachment to wife? Why such longing for name and fame? Give up all
these, now, and direct your mind to God with whole-souled devotion.
Enjoy the Bliss of God.\"

Dr. Sarkar sat still without uttering a word. The devotees also remained
silent.

**How a Jnāni should meditate**

MASTER: \"Nangta used to tell me how a Jnāni meditates. Everywhere is
water; all the regions above and below are filled with water; man, like
a fish, is swimming joyously in that water. In real meditation you will
actually see all this.

\"Take the case of the infinite ocean. There is no limit to its water:
Suppose a pot is immersed in it: there is water both inside and outside
the pot. The Jnāni sees that both inside and outside there is nothing
but Parmatman. Then what is this pot? It is \'I-consciousness\'. Because
of the pot the water appears to be divided into two parts; because of
the pot you seem to perceive an inside and an outside. One feels that
way as long as this pot of \'I\' exists. When the \'I\' disappears, what
is remains. That cannot be described in words.

\"Do you know another way a Jnāni meditates? Think of infinite Ākāśa and
a bird flying there, joyfully spreading Its wings. There is the
Chidakasa, and Ātman is the bird. The bird is not imprisoned in a cage;
it flies in the Chidakasa. Its joy is limitless.\"

The devotees listened with great attention to these words about
meditation.After a time Pratap resumed the conversation.

PRATAP (to Dr. Sarkar): \"When one thinks seriously, one undoubtedly
sees everything as a mere shadow.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"If you speak of a shadow, then you need three things: the
sun, the object, and the shadow. How can there be any shadow without an
object? And you say that God is real and the creation unreal. I say that
the creation is real too.\"

PRATAP: \"Very well. As you see a reflection in a mirror, so you see
this universe in the mirror of your mind.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"But how can there be a reflection without an object?\"

NARENDRA: \"Why, God is the object.\"

Dr. Sarkar remained silent.

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar): \"You said a very fine thing. No one else has
said before that samādhi is the result of the union of the mind with
God. You alone have said that.

\"Shivanath said that one lost one\'s head by too much thinking of God.
In other words, one becomes unconscious by meditating on the Universal
Consciousness. Think of it! Becoming unconscious by contemplating

Him who is of the very nature of Consciousness, and whose Consciousness
endows the world with consciousness!

\"And what does your \'science\' say? This combined with this produces
that; that combined with that produces this. One is more likely to lose
consciousness by contemplating those things-by handling material things
too much.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"One can see God in those things.\"

1.  \"If so, one sees God more clearly in man, and still better in a
    great soul. In a great soul there is a greater manifestation of
    God.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"Yes, in man, no doubt.\"

**Losing consciousness in the thought of God**

MASTER: \"Losing consciousness by contemplating God-through whose
Consciousness even inert matter appears to be conscious, and hands,
feet, and body move! People say that the body moves of itself; but they
do not know that it is God who moves it. They say that water scalds the
hand. But water can by no means scald the hand; it is the heat in the
water, the fire in the water, that scalds.

\"Rice is boiling in a pot. Potatoes and egg-plant are also jumping
about in the pot. The children say that the potatoes and egg-plant jump
of themselves; they do not know that there is fire underneath. Man says
that the sense-organs do their work of themselves; but he does not know
that inside dwells He whose very nature is Consciousness.\"

Dr. Sarkar stood up. He was about to take his leave. Sri Ramakrishna
also stood up.

DR. SARKAR: \"People call on God when they are faced with a crisis. Is
it for the mere fun of it that they say, \'O Lord! Thou, Thou!\'? You
speak of God because of that trouble in your throat. You have now fallen
into the clutches of the cotton-carder. You had better speak to the
carder. I am just quoting your own words.\"

MASTER: \"There is nothing for me to say.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"Why not? We lie in the lap of God. We feel free with Him.
To whom should we speak about our illness if not to Him?\"

MASTER: \"Right you are. Once in a while I try to speak to Him about it,
but I do not succeed.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"Why should you even speak to Him? Does He not know of
it?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"A Musslman, while saying his prayers, shouted: \'O
Allah! O Allah!\' Another person said to him: \'You are calling on
Allah. That\'s all right. But why are you shouting like that? Don\'t you
know that He hears the sound of the anklets on the feet of an ant?\'

**Story of Vilwamangal**

\"When the mind is united with God, one sees Him very near, in one\'s
own heart. But you must remember one thing. The more you realize this
unity, the farther your mind is withdrawn from worldly things. There is
the story of Vilwamangal in the Bhaktamala. He used to visit a
prostitute. One night he was very late in going to her house. He had
been detained at home by the sraddha ceremony of his father and mother.
In his hands he was carrying the food offered in the ceremony, to feed
his mistress. His whole soul was so set upon the woman that he was not
at all conscious of his movements. He didn\'t even know how he was
walking. There was a yogi seated on the path, meditating on God with
eyes closed. Vilwamangal stepped on him. The yogi became angry, and
cried out: \'What? Are you blind? I have been thinking of God, and you
step on my body!\' \'I beg your pardon,\' said Vilwamangal, \'but may I
ask you something? I have been unconscious, thinking of a prostitute,
and you are conscious of the outer world though thinking of God. What
kind of meditation is that?\'

> In the end Vilwamangal renounced the world and went away in order to
> worship God. He said to the prostitute: \'You are my guru. You have
> taught me how one should yearn for God.\' He addressed the prostitute
> as his mother and gave her up.\"
>
> DR. SARKAR: \"To address a woman as mother is the Tantrik form of
> worship.\"
>
> **Stories of the Bhagavata scholars**
>
> MASTER: \"Listen to a story. There was a king who used daily to hear
> the Bhagavata recited by a pundit. Every day, after explaining the
> sacred book, the pundit would say to the king, \'O King, have you
> understood what I have said?\' And every day the king would reply,
> \'You had better understand it first yourself.\' The pundit would
> return home and think: \'Why does the king talk to me that way day
> after day? I explain the texts to him so clearly, and he says to me,
> \"You had better understand it first yourself.\" What does he mean?\'
> The pundit used to practise spiritual discipline. A few days later he
> came to realize that God alone is real and everything else-house,
> family, wealth, friends, name, and fame-illusory. Convinced of the
> unreality of the world, he renounced it. As he left home he asked a
> man to take this message to the king: \'O King, I now understand.\'
>
> \"Here is another story. A man needed a scholar of the Bhagavata to
> expound the sacred text to him every day. But it was very difficult to
> procure such a scholar. After he had searched a great deal, another
> man came to him and said, \'Sir, I have found an excellent scholar of
> the Bhagavata.\' \'Very well,\' said the man, \'bring him here.\' The
> other man replied: \'But there is a little hitch. The scholar has a
> few ploughs and bullocks; he is busy with them all day. He must look
> after the cultivation of his land. He hasn\'t a moment\'s leisure.
> Thereupon the man who required the scholar said: \'I don\'t want a
> Bhagavata scholar who is burdened with ploughs and bullocks. I want a
> man who has leisure and can tell me about God.\' (To Dr. Sarhar) Do
> you understand?\"
>
> Dr. Sarkar remained silent.
>
> **Uselessness of mere scholarship**
>
> MASTER: \"Shall I tell you the truth? What will you gain by mere
> scholarship? The pundits hear many things and know many things-the
> Vedas, the Puranas, the Tantras. But of what avail is mere
> scholarship? Discrimination and renunciation are necessary. If a man
> has discrimination and renunciation, then one can listen to him. But
> of what use are the words of a man who looks on the world as the
> essential thing?
>
> \"What is the lesson of the Gitā? It is what you get by repeating the
> word ten times. As you repeat \'Gitā\', \'Gitā\', the word becomes
> reversed into \'tagi\', \'tagi\'-which implies renunciation. He alone
> has understood the secret of the Gitā who has renounced his attachment
> to \'woman and gold\' and has directed his entire love to God. It
> isn\'t necessary to read the whole of the Gitā. The purpose of reading
> the book is served if one practises renunciation.\"
>
> DR. SARKAR: \"A man once explained the meaning of Radha to me. He said
> to me: \'Do you know the meaning of Radha? Reverse the word and it
> becomes \"dhara.\" That\'s the meaning.\' (All laugh.) Well, let us
> stop here for today.\"
>
> Dr. Sarkar left. M. sat near Sri Ramakrishna and repeated the
> conversation he had had at Dr. Sarkar\'s house.

1.  \"Dr. Sarkar was feeding the goldfish with cardamom shells and the
    sparrows with flour pellets. He said to me: \'Did you notice? The
    fish didn\'t see the cardamom shells and therefore went away. First
    of all we want knowledge, and then bhakti. Did you notice those
    sparrows? They too flew away when I threw the pellets of flour. They
    have no jnāna; therefore they have no bhakti.\' \"

> MASTER (smiling): \"That knowledge means the knowledge of the physical
> world, the knowledge of \'science\'.\"

1.  \"He said further: \'Must I believe a thing simply because a
    Chaitanya or a Buddha or a Christ has said it? That would not be
    proper.\' A grandson has been born to him. He praised his
    daughter-in-law highly. He said, \'I don\'t notice her at all in the
    house; she is so quiet and bashful.\' \"

MASTER: \"He has been thinking of this place \[meaning himself\]. His
faith is growing. Is it possible to get rid of egotism altogether? Such
scholarship! Such fame! And he has so much money! But he doesn\'t show
disrespect for what I say.\"

It was about five o\'clock in the afternoon. The devotees were sitting
quietly in the room. Many outsiders also were present. All sat in
silence.

M. was seated very near Sri Ramakrishna, Now and then they exchanged a
word or two in a low voice. The Master wanted to put on his coat. M.
helped him.

MASTER (to M.): \"You see, nowadays it is not necessary for me to
meditate much. All at once I become aware of the Indivisible Brahman.
Nowadays the vision of the Absolute is continuous with me.\"

M. did not reply. The room was full of men, all silent.

Presently Sri Ramakrishna spoke.

MASTER: \"Well, all these people are sitting here without uttering a
word. Their eyes are fixed on me. They are neither talking nor singing.
What do they see in me?\"

M. said to the Master: \"Sir, they have already heard many things you
have said. Now they are seeing what they can never see anywhere else-a
man always blissful, of childlike nature, free from egotism, and
intoxicated with divine love. The other day you were pacing the outer
room of Ishan\'s house. We too were with you. A man came to me and said
that he had never before seen such a happy person as you.\"

M. became silent. The room was still. A few minutes later Sri
Ramakrishna spoke to M. in a whisper.

MASTER: \"Well, how is the doctor coming along? Does he now receive well
the ideas of this place?\"

1.  \"How can an effective seed fail to sprout? It must germinate
    somehow or other. I feel like laughing when I remember what you said
    the other day.\"

MASTER: \"What was that?\"

1.  \"You said that Jadu Mallick was so absent-minded that while taking
    his meals he didn\'t know whether a particular dish was seasoned
    with salt or not. If anyone pointed out to him that a dish was not
    salted, he would say, in a surprised voice: \'Yes? Yes? I see it is
    not salted.\' You told this to the doctor because he had said to you
    that he was always absent-minded. You meant that he became
    absent-minded thinking of worldly things and not because of
    contemplation of God.\"

MASTER: \"Will he not pay attention to what I say?\"

1.  \"Of course he will. But he forgets many of your instructions
    because of his numerous duties. Today, too, he made a nice remark
    when he said, To look on a woman as mother is a spiritual discipline
    of the Tantra.\'\"

MASTER: \"What did I say to that?\"

1.  \"You told him about that Bhagavata scholar who owned bullocks and
    ploughs. (The Master smiles.) Further, you told him about the king
    who said to the pundit of the Bhagavata, \'You had better understand
    it yourself first.\' (The Master smiles.)

\"Then you told him about the Gitā, whose essence is the renunciation of
\'woman and gold\', renunciation of the attachment to \'woman and
gold\'. You said to him, \'How can a worldly man who has not renounced
\"woman and gold\" teach others?\' Perhaps he didn\'t understand the
drift of your words. He changed the subject.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was thinking about the welfare of his devotees. Purna
and Manindra were two of his young devotees. He sent Manindra to talk to
Purna.

It was evening. A lamp was burning in Sri Ramakrishna\'s room. The
devotees and visitors were sitting at a distance. The Master was
introspective. Those in the room were also thinking of God and sat in
silence.

A few minutes afterwards Narendra entered the room with a friend, whom
he introduced to the Master as an author. Sri Ramakrishna talked with
him about the metaphysical significance of Radha and Krishna. The author
said that Radha and Krishna were the Supreme Brahman. Vishnu, Śiva,
Durga, and the other deities had sprung from them.

**Different aspects of Radha**

MASTER: \"That is good. There are different aspects of Radha. In Her
seductive aspect She was Chandravali. In Her aspect of love She
participated in Sri Krishna\'s lila at Vrindāvan. Nandaghosh, Krishna\'s
foster-father, had the vision of the Eternal Radha.

\"First is the seductive Radha, then the Radha of love. If you go
farther, you will see the Eternal Radha. It is like taking off the
layers of an onion one by one. First the red layers, then the pink, then
the white. Afterwards you don\'t find any more layers. Such is the
nature of the Eternal Radha, Radha the Absolute. There the
discrimination following the process of \'Not this, not this\' comes to
an end.

\'There are two aspects of Radha-Krishna: the Absolute and the Relative.
They are like the sun and its rays.

The Absolute may be likened to the sun, and the Relative to the rays.

\"A genuine bhakta dwells sometimes on the Absolute and sometimes on the
Relative. Both the Absolute and the Relative belong to one and the same
Reality. It is all one-neither two nor many.\"

AUTHOR: \"Sir, why do they speak of the \'Krishna of Vrindāvan\' and the
\'Krishna of Mathura\'?\"

MASTER: \"That is the view of the goswamis. But the scholars of upper
India think differently. According to these scholars there is only
Krishna, and no Radha. The Krishna of Dwaraka is not associated with
Radha.\"

AUTHOR: \"Sir, Radha and Krishna are themselves the Supreme Brahman.\"

MASTER: \"That is good. But you must remember that everything is
possible for God. He is formless, and again He assumes forms. He is the
individual and He is the universe. He is Brahman and He is Śakti. There
is no end to Him, no limit. Nothing is impossible for Him. No matter how
high the kites and vultures soar, they can never strike against the
ceiling of the sky.

**Brahman is indescribable**

If you ask me what Brahman is like, all I can say is that It cannot be
described in words. Even when one has realized Brahman, one cannot
describe It. If someone asks you what ghee is like, your answer will be,
\'Ghee is like ghee.\' The only analogy for Brahman is Brahman. Nothing
exists besides It.\"

**Saturday, October 31, 1885**

**Hariballav**

Hariballav Bose, a cousin of Balarām, came to see Sri Ramakrishna. He
saluted the Master respectfully.

Hariballav was the government pleader at Cuttack. He did not approve of
Balarām\'s visiting the Master, especially with the ladies of the
family: Balarām had said to his cousin: \"You had better meet him first.
Then you can say whatever you like.\"

Presently the Master and Hariballav became engaged in conversation.

MASTER: \"Can you tell me how I shall get well? Do you think this is a
serious illness?\"

HARIBALLAV: \"Sir, the doctors can tell you better than I about that.\"

MASTER: \"When the women take the dust of my feet, I say to myself that
they are saluting God, who dwells inside me. I look at it in that way.\"

HARIBALLAV: \"You are a holy man. All should take the dust of your feet.
What harm is there in that?\"

MASTER: \"You may speak that way about sages like Dhruva, Prahlada,
Nārada, or Kapila; but who am I? Please come again.\"

HARIBALLAV: \"I shall certainly come, because you attract me. You don\'t
have to urge me.\"

Hariballav was about to depart. He saluted Sri Ramakrishna and was going
to take the dust of the Master\'s feet, when Sri Ramakrishna moved his
feet away. But Hariballav persisted; he took the dust of Sri
Ramakrishna\'s feet against the latter\'s wish.

When he stood up, the Master stood up too, to show him courtesy. The
Master said to him: \"Balarām feels unhappy because I don\'t go to his
house. I thought of visiting you all there one day, but then I was
afraid you might say to Balarām, \'Who asked him to come here?\'\"

HARIBALLAV: \"Who has been telling you things? Please don\'t let such a
thought enter your mind.\"

Hariballav departed.

MASTER (to M.): \"He is a devotee of God; why else would he have
forcibly taken the dust of my feet? I told you the other day that in
samādhi I had seen Dr. Sarkar and another person. He is the other
person. So he has come.\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. Undoubtedly he is a bhakta.\" MASTER: \"How guileless he
    is!\"

M. went to Dr.Sarkar\'s house to report Sri Ramakrishna\'s condition.
The doctor talked to M. about Sri Ramakrishna, Mahimacharan, and the
other devotees.

DOCTOR: \"Mahimacharan didn\'t bring the book he promised to show me. He
said he had forgotten all about it. It is quite possible. I am forgetful
too.\"

M: \"He has read a great deal.\"

DOCTOR: \"Then why is he in such a plight?\"

Referring to the Master, the doctor said: \"What will a man accomplish
with mere bhakti? He needs jnāna too.\"

**M. explains Master\'s conceptions of jnāna and bhakti**

1.  \"Why, the Master says that bhakti comes after jnāna. But his
    conception of jnāna and bhakti is quite different from yours. When
    he says that one obtains bhakti after jnāna, he means that first
    comes the Knowledge of Reality and then bhakti; first the Knowledge
    of Brahman and then bhakti; first the Knowledge of God and then love
    for Him. When you speak of jnāna you mean the knowledge obtained
    through the senses. The jnāna Sri Ramakrishna speaks of cannot be
    verified by our standards. The Knowledge of Reality cannot be tested
    by the knowledge obtained through the senses. But your jnāna, the
    knowledge through the senses, can be verified.\"

The doctor remained silent. Then he referred to the subject of Divine
Incarnation.

DOCTOR: \"What is this idea of Divine Incarnation? What is this taking
the dust of a man\'s feet?\"

1.  \"Why, you say that during your experiments in the laboratory you go
    into ecstasy when you think of God\'s creation. Further, you feel
    the same emotion when you think of man. If that is so, why
    shouldn\'t we bow our heads before God? God dwells in the heart of
    man.

\"According to Hinduism God dwells in all beings. You have not studied
this subject much. Since God dwells in all beings, what is wrong in
saluting a man?

\"Sri Ramakrishna says that there is a greater manifestation of God in
certain things than in others, as the sun is reflected better by water
and by a mirror than by other objects. Water exists everywhere, but is
most apparent in a river or lake. We bow down to God and not to man. God
is God-not, man is God.

\"God cannot be known through reasoning. All depends on faith. Of
course, I am repeating to you what Sri Ramakrishna says.\"

Dr. Sarkar presented M. with one of his books, *The Physiological Basis
of Psychology*. He wrote on the first page \"As a token of brotherly
regards.\"

**Misra\'s visit**

It was about eleven o\'clock in the morning. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting
in his room with the devotees. He was talking to a Christian devotee
named Misra. Misra was born of a Christian family in northwestern India
and belonged to the Quaker sect. He was thirty-five years old. Though
clad in European dress he wore the ochre cloth of a sannyāsi under his
foreign clothes. Two of his brothers had died on the day fixed for the
marriage of one of them, and on that very day Misra had renounced the
world.

MISRA: \" \'It is Rāma alone who dwells in all beings.\'\"

Sri Ramkarishna said to the younger Naren, within Misra\'s hearing:
\"Rāma is one, but He has a thousand names. He who is called \'God\' by
the Christians is addressed by the Hindus as Rāma, Krishna, Isvara, and
by other names. A lake has many ghats. The Hindus drink water at one
ghat and call it \'jal\'; the Christians at another, and call it
\'water\'; the Mussalmans at a third, and call it \'pani\'. Likewise, He
who is God to the Christians is Allah to the Musslmans.\"

MISRA: \"Jesus is not the son of Mary. He is God Himself. (To the
devotees) Now he (pointing to Sri Ramakrishna) is as you see him-again,
he is God Himself. You are not able to recognize him. I have seen him
before, in visions, though I see him now directly with my eyes. I saw a
garden where he was seated on a raised seat. Another person was seated
on the ground, but he was not so far advanced.

\"There are four door-keepers of God in this country: Tukaram in Bombay,
Robert Michael in Kashmir, himself \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\] in this
part of the country, and another person in eastern Bengal.\"

MASTER: \"Do you see visions?\"

MISRA: \"Sir, even when I lived at home I used to see light. Then I had
a vision of Jesus. How can I describe that beauty? How insignificant is
the beauty of a woman compared with that beauty!\"

After a while Misra took off his trousers and showed the devotees the
*Gerruā* loin-cloth that he wore underneath.

Presently Sri Ramakrishna went out on the porch. Returning to the room,
he said to the devotees, \"I saw him \[meaning Misra\] standing in a
heroic posture.\" As he uttered these words he went into samādhi. He
stood facing the west.

Regaining partial consciousness, he fixed his gaze on Misra and began to
laugh. Still in an ecstatic mood, he shook hands with him and laughed
again. Taking him by the hands, he said, \"You will get what you are
seeking.\"

MISRA (with folded hands): \"Since that day I have surrendered to you my
mind, soul, and body.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was laughing, still in an ecstatic mood.

The Master resumed his seat. Misra was describing his worldly life to
the devotees. He told them how his two brothers were killed when the
canopy came down at the time of the marriage.

Sri Ramakrishna asked the devotees to take care of Misra.

Dr.Sarkar arrived. At the sight of him Sri Ramakrishna went into
samādhi. When his ecstasy abated a little, he said, \"First the bliss of
divine inebriation and then the Bliss of Satchidananda, the Cause of the
cause.\"

DOCTOR: \"Yes.\"

MASTER: \"I am not unconscious.\"

The doctor realized that the Master was inebriated with divine bliss.
Therefore he said, \"No, no! You are quite conscious.\"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled and said:

> *I drink no ordinary wine, but Wine of Everlasting Bliss,*
>
> *As I repeat my Mother Kāli\'s name;*
>
> *It so intoxicates my mind that people take me to be drunk!*
>
> *First my guru gives molasses for the making of the Wine;*
>
> *My longing is the ferment to transform it.*
>
> *Knowledge, the maker of the Wine, prepares it for me then;*
>
> *And when it is done, my mind imbibes it from the bottle of the
> mantra,*
>
> *Taking the Mother\'s name to make it pure.*
>
> *Drink of this Wine, says Ramprasad, and the four fruits of life are
> yours.*

**Master blesses Dr. Sarkar**

As the doctor listened to the words, he too became almost ecstatic. Sri
Ramakrishna again went into a deep spiritual mood and placed his foot on
the doctor\'s lap. A few minutes later he became conscious of the outer
world and withdrew his foot. He said to the doctor: \"Ah, what a
splendid thing you said the other day! \'We lie in the lap of God. To
whom shall we speak about our illness if not to Him?\' If I must pray, I
shall certainly pray to Him.\" As Sri Ramakrishna said these words, his
eyes filled with tears. Again he went into ecstasy and said to the
doctor, \"You are very pure; otherwise I could not have put my foot on
your lap.\" Continuing, he said: \"\'He alone has peace who has tasted
the Bliss of Rāma.\' What is this world? What is there in it? What is
there in money, wealth, honour, or creature comforts? \'O mind, know
Rāma! Whom else should you know?\' \"

The devotees were worried to see the Master\'s repeated ecstasies in
this state of ill health. He said, \"I shall be quiet if someone sings
that song- \'The Wine of Heavenly Bliss\'.\"

Narendra was sent for from another room. He sang in his sweet voice:

> *Be drunk, O mind, be drunk with the Wine of Heavenly Bliss! Roll on
> the ground and weep, chanting Hari\'s sweet name! Fill the arching
> heavens with your deep lion roar,*
>
> *Singing Hari\'s sweet name! With both your arms upraised,*
>
> *Dance in the name of Hari and give His name to all!*
>
> *Swim day and night in the sea of the bliss of Hari\'s love;*
>
> *Slay desire with His name, and blessed be your life!*

MASTER: \"And that one-\'Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness\'.\"

Narendra sang:

> *Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness waves of ecstatic love arise:*
>
> *Rapture divine! Play of God\'s Bliss!*
>
> *Oh, how enthralling! . .*

Narendra sang again:

> *Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord Hari,*
>
> *The Stainless One, Pure Spirit through and through.*
>
> *How peerless is the light that in Him shines!*
>
> *How soul-bewitching is His wondrous form!*
>
> *How dear is He to all His devotees!*
>
> *Ever more beauteous in fresh-blossoming love*
>
> *That shames the splendour of a million moons,*
>
> *Like lightning gleams the glory of His form,*
>
> *Raising erect the hair for very joy.*
>
> *Worship His feet in the lotus of your heart;*
>
> *With mind serene and eyes made radiant*
>
> *With heavenly love, behold that matchless sight.*
>
> *Caught in the spell of His love\'s ecstasy,*
>
> *Immerse yourself for evermore, O mind,*
>
> *In Him who is Pure Knowledge and Pure Bliss.*

Dr. Sarkar listened to the songs attentively. When the singing was over,
he said, \'That\'s a nice one- \'Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness\'.\"

At the sight of the doctor\'s joy, Sri Ramakrishna said: \"The son said
to the father, \'Father, you taste a little wine, and after that, if you
ask me to give up drinking, I shall do so.\' After drinking the wine,
the father said: \'Son, you may give it up. I have no objection. But I
am certainly not going to give it up myself!\' (The doctor and the
others laugh.)

\"The other day the Divine Mother showed me two men in a vision. He
\[meaning the doctor\] is one. She also revealed to me that he will have
much knowledge; but it is dry knowledge. (Smiling, to the doctor) But
you will soften.\"

Dr. Sarkar remained silent.

**Friday, November 6, 1885**

It was the day of the Kāli Puja, the worship of the Divine Mother, Sri
Ramakrishna\'s Chosen Ideal. At about nine o\'clock in the morning the
Master, clad in a new cloth, stood in the south room on the second floor
of his temporary residence at Syampukur . He had asked M. to offer
worship to Siddhesvari at Thanthania, in the central part of Calcutta,
with flowers, green coconut, sugar, and other sweets. After bathing in
the Ganges, M. had offered the worship and come barefoot to Syampukur .
He had brought the Prasad with him. Sri Ramakrishna took off his shoes
and with great reverence ate a little of the Prasad and placed a little
on his

head.

At the Master\'s request M. had purchased two books of songs by
Ramprasad and Kamlakanta for Dr. Sarkar.

M: \"Here are the books of songs by Ramprasad and Kamlakanta.\"

MASTER: \"Force songs like these on the doctor:

> *How are you trying, O my mind, to know the nature of God?. . .*
>
> *Who is there that can understand what Mother Kāli is?. . . .*
>
> *O mind, you do not know how to farm!*
>
> *Fallow lies the field of your life.. . .*
>
> *Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to Kāli, the Wish-fulfilling
> Tree. . . .\"*

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was pacing the room with M. He had put on his slippers.
In spite of his painful illness his face beamed with joy.

MASTER: \"And this song is also very good: \'This world is a framework
of illusion.\' \"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna gave a start. He put aside his slippers and
stood still. He was in deep samādhi. It was the day of the Divine
Mother\'s worship. Was that why he frequently went into samādhi? After a
long while he sighed and restrained his emotion as if with great
difficulty.

It was about ten o\'clock. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on his bed,
leaning against the pillow. The devotees sat around him. Ram, Rākhāl ,
Niranjan, Kalipada, M., and many others were present. Sri Ramakrishna
was talking about his nephew Hriday.

**About Hriday**

MASTER: \"Hriday is even now clamouring for land. He said to me one day
while he was living with me at Dakshineswar, \'Give me a shawl, or I
will sue you.\' The Divine Mother removed him from Dakshineswar. He
pestered the visitors for money. If he had stayed with me all these
people could not have come. That is why the Mother removed him. R-also
began to act that way. He became querulous. When he was asked to
accompany me in a carriage he would hold back. He would be annoyed if
the other youngsters came to me. If I went to Calcutta to see them, he
would say: \'Why should you bother about them? Will they renounce the
world?\' If I wanted to offer refreshments to the other young boys, I
would be afraid of R-and say to him, \'Take some yourself and then give
it to them.\' I came to know that he would not stay with me. Thereupon I
Said to the Divine Mother, \'Mother, don\'t remove him altogether, like
Hriday.\' Then I came to know that he was going to Vrindāvan. If R-had
stayed with me at that time, all these youngsters could not have mixed
with me. He left for Vrindāvan and these young boys began to visit me
frequently.\"

R- (humbly): \"Sir, that wasn\'t really in my mind.\"

RAM (to R-): \"Do you think you understand your mind as well as he
understands it?\"

R- remained silent.

MASTER (to R-): \"Why should you feel that way? I love you more than a
father loves his son. . . . Now please keep quiet. . . You no longer
have that attitude.\"

After a time the devotees went to another room. Sri Ramakrishna sent for
R- and said to him, \"Did you mind what I said?\"

R-: \"No, sir.\"

Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: \"It is the day of the Kāli Puja. It is good
to make some arrangements for the worship. Please speak to the devotees
about it.\"

M. went to the drawing-room and told the devotees what the Master had
said. Kalipada and others busied themselves with the arrangements.

About two o\'clock in the afternoon Dr. Sarkar arrived, accompanied by
Professor Nilmani. The doctor listened to the report of the illness and
prescribed medicine. Sri Ramakrishna said to him, \"These two books have
been purchased for you.\" M. handed him the books.

The doctor wanted to hear some songs. At the Master\'s bidding, M. and
another devotee sang:

> *How are you trying O my mind, to know the nature of God?*
>
> *You are groping like a madman locked in a dark room. . .*

Then they sang:

> *Who is there that can understand what Mother Kāli is?*
>
> *Even the six darsanas are powerless to reveal Her.*
>
> *It is She, the scriptures say, that is the Inner Self*
>
> *Of the yogi, who in Self discovers all his joy;*
>
> *She that, of Her own sweet will, inhabits every living thing.*
>
> *The macrocosm and microcosm rest in the Mother\'s womb;*
>
> *Now do you see how vast it is? In the Muladhara*
>
> *The yogi meditates on Her, and in the Sahasrara:*
>
> *Who but Śiva has beheld Her as She really is?*
>
> *Within the lotus wilderness She sports beside Her Mate, the Swan.*
>
> *When man aspires to understand Her, Ramprasad must smile;*
>
> *To think of knowing Her, he says, is quite as laughable*
>
> *As to imagine one can swim across the boundless sea.*
>
> *But while my mind has understood, alas! my heart has not;*
>
> *Though but a dwarf, it still would strive to make a captive of the
> moon.*

Again they sang:

> *O mind, you do not know how to farm!*
>
> *Fallow lies the field of your life.*
>
> *If you had only worked it well,*
>
> *How rich a harvest you might reap! . . .*

Then:

> *Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to Kāli, the Wish-fulfilling
> Tree, And there beneath It gather the four fruits of life. . . .*

Dr. Sarkar said to Girish, \"That song of yours is very nice-the one
about the vina, in the Life of Buddha.\" At a hint from the Master,
Girish and Kalipada sang together:

> *Behold my vina, my dearly beloved,*
>
> *My lute of sweetest tone;*
>
> *If tenderly you play on it,*
>
> *The strings will waken, at your touch,*
>
> *To rarest melodies. . .*

*nux vomica*

They continued:

> *We moan for rest, alas! but rest can never find;*
>
> *We know not whence we come, nor where we float away.*
>
> *Time and again we tread this round of smiles and tears;*
>
> *In vain we pine to know whither our pathway leads,*
>
> *And why we play this empty play. . . .*

They sang again:

> *Hold me fast, O Nitai! I feel as if I shall pass away!*
>
> *Bestowing Hari\'s name on men,*
>
> *I raised high waves in the river of my love,*
>
> *And now upon its raging stream I am carried helplessly.*
>
> *With grief my heart is laden down;*
>
> *Alas! Nitai, to whom shall I speak of it?*
>
> *Behold, I am swiftly borne away by the current of man\'s deep woe.*

Then they sang:

> *Jagai! Madhai! Oh come and dance,*
>
> *Chanting Hari\'s name with fervour! . . .*

And finally:

> *Come one and all! Take Radha\'s love!*
>
> *The high tide of her love flows by;*
>
> *It will not last for very long.*
>
> *Oh, come then! Come ye, one and all! . . .*

Listening to these songs, two or three of the devotees-among them,
Manindra and Lātu, went into a spiritual mood. Lātu was seated by
Niranjan\'s side. When the singing was over, the Master spoke with the
doctor. The

previous day Dr. Pratap Mazumdar had prescribed for the Master. Dr.
Sarkar was annoyed to hear

of it.

DOCTOR: \"To give him *nux vomica!* Why, I am not dead yet\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Why should you die? God forbid! May your avidyā
die.\"

DOCTOR: \"I never have any avidyā!\"

Dr. Sarkar understood avidyā to mean \"Mistress\".

MASTER (smiling): \"Oh, no! I don\'t mean that! In the case of a
sannyāsi, his mother, Avidyā, Ignorance, dies giving birth to a child,
Viveka, Discrimination.\"

Hariballav arrived. Sri Ramakrishna said, \"I feel very happy when I see
you.\" Hariballav was a man of very humble nature; he sat on the bare
floor and not on the mat. He began to fan the Master. He was the
government lawyer at Cuttack. Professor Nilmani sat near them. Sri
Ramakrishna did not want to offend him; casting his glance on the
professor, he said, \"Oh, what a grand day it is for me!\"

A few minutes later Dr. Sarkar and Professor Nilmani took their leave.
Hariballav also departed, saying that he would come again.

**Worship of Kāli**

It is the dark night of the new moon. At seven o\'clock the devotees
make arrangements for the worship of

Kāli in Sri Ramakrishna\'s room on the second floor. Flowers,
sandal-paste, vilwa-leaves, red hibiscus, rice pudding, and various
sweets and other articles of worship are placed in front of the Master.
The devotees are sitting around him. There are present, among others,
Sarat, Śaśi, Ram, Girish, Chunilal, M., Rākhāl , Niranjan, and the
younger Naren.

Sri Ramakrishna asks a devotee to bring some incense. A few minutes
later he offers all the articles to the Divine Mother. M. is seated
close to him. Looking at M., he says to the devotees, \"Meditate a
little.\" The devotees close their eyes.

Presently Girish offers a garland of flowers at Sri Ramakrishna\'s feet.
M. offers flowers and sandal-paste.

Rākhāl , Ram, and the other devotees follow him.

Niranjan offers a flower at Sri Ramakrishna\'s feet, crying:
\"Brahmamayi! Brahmamayi!\" and prostrates himself before him, touching
the Master\'s feet with his head. The devotees cry out, \"Jai Ma!\",
\"Hail to the Mother!\"

**Manifestation of the Divine Mother through the Master**

In the twinkling of an eye Sri Ramakrishna goes into deep samādhi. An
amazing transformation takes place in the Master before the very eyes of
the devotees. His face shines with a heavenly light. His two hands are
raised in the posture of granting boons and giving assurance to the
devotees; it is the posture one sees in images of the Divine Mother. His
body is motionless; he has no consciousness of the outer world. He sits
facing the north. Is the Divine Mother of the Universe manifesting
Herself through his person? Speechless with wonder, the devotees look
intently at Sri Ramakrishna, who appears to them to be the embodiment of
the Divine Mother Herself.

The devotees begin to sing hymns, one of them leading and the rest
following in chorus.

Girish sings:

> *Who is this Woman with the thick black hair,*
>
> *Shining amidst the assembly of the gods?*
>
> *Who is She, whose feet are like crimson lotuses*
>
> *Planted on Śiva\'s chest?*
>
> *Who is She, whose toe-nails shine like the full moon,*
>
> *Whose legs burn with the brightness of the sun?*
>
> *Who is She, who now speaks soft and smiles on us,*
>
> *And now fills all the quarters of the sky*
>
> *With shouts of terrible laughter?*

Again:

> *O Mother, Saviour of the helpless, Thou the Slayer of sin!*
>
> *In Thee do the three Gunās dwell-sattva, rajas, and tamas;*
>
> *Thou dost create the world;*
>
> *Thou dost sustain it and destroy it;*
>
> *Binding Thyself with attributes, Thou yet transcendest them;*
>
> *For Thou, O Mother, art the All. . . .*

Behari sings:

> *O Syama, Thou who dost sit upon a corpse!*
>
> *I beg Thee, hear my heart\'s most fervent prayer:*
>
> *As my last breath forsakes this mortal flesh,*
>
> *Reveal Thyself within my heart!*
>
> *Then, in my mind, from forest and from grove*
>
> *I shall gather Thee red hibiscus flowers,*
>
> *And, scenting them with the sandal-paste of Love,*
>
> *Shall lay them at Thy Lotus Feet.*

M. sings with the other devotees:

> *O Mother, all is done after Thine own sweet will;*
>
> *Thou art in truth self-willed, Redeemer of mankind!*
>
> *Thou workest Thine own work; men only call it theirs. . .*

They sing again:

> *All things are possible, O Mother, through Thy grace;*
>
> *Obstacles mountain high Thou makest to melt away.*
>
> *Thou Home of Bliss! To all Thou givest peace and joy;*
>
> *Why then should I be made to suffer fruitlessly,*
>
> *Brooding on the success or failure of my deeds?*

And again:

> *O Mother, ever blissful as Thou art,*
>
> *Do not deprive Thy worthless child of bliss!*
>
> *My mind knows nothing but Thy Lotus Feet.*
>
> *The King of Death scowls at me terribly;*
>
> *Tell me, Mother, what shall I say to him? . . .*

They conclude:

> *In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles; Therefore
> the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave. .*

Gradually Sri Ramakrishna came back to the consciousness of the outer
world. He asked the devotees to sing \"O Mother Syama, full of the waves
of drunkenness divine\". They sang:

> *O Mother Syama, full of the waves of drunkenness divine!*
>
> *Who knows how Thou dost sport in the world?*
>
> *Thy fun and frolic and Thy glances put to shame the god of love. . .
> .*

When this song was over, Sri Ramakrishna asked the devotees to sing
\"Behold my Mother playing with Śiva\".

The devotees sang:

> *Behold my Mother playing with Śiva, lost in an ecstasy of joy!*
>
> *Drunk with a draught of celestial wine, She reels, and yet She does
> not fall. . . .*

**Master in deep ecstasy**

Sri Ramakrishna tasted a little Pudding to make the devotees happy, but
immediately went into deep ecstasy.

A few minutes later the devotees prostrated themselves before the Master
and went into the drawing-room.

There they enjoyed the Prasad.

It was nine o\'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna sent word to the
devotees, asking them to go to Surendra\'s house to participate in the
worship of Kāli.

They arrived at Surendra\'s house on Simla Street and were received very
cordially. Surendra conducted them to the drawing-room on the second
floor. The house was filled with a festive atmosphere and a veritable
mart of joy was created with the songs and music of the devotees. It was
very late at night when they returned to their homes after enjoying the
sumptuous feast given by Surendra, the Master\'s beloved disciple.

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 49**

THE MASTER AT COSSIPORE

> Wednesday, December 23, 1885

**Master moved to Cossipore**

ON FRIDAY, DECEMBER 11, Sri Ramakrishna was moved to a beautiful house
at Cossipore, a suburb of Calcutta. The house was situated in a garden
covering about five acres of land and abounding in fruit trees and
flowering plants. Here the final curtain fell on the Master\'s life.

At Cossipore he set himself with redoubled energy to the completion of
the work of spiritual ministration he had begun long before at
Dakshineswar. Realizing that the end of\' his physical life was
approaching, he gave away his spiritual treasures without stint to one
and all. He was like one of those fruit-sellers who bring their fruit to
the market-place, bargain at first about the prices, but then toward
sunset, when the market is about to close, give away the fruit
indiscriminately. Here his disciples saw the greatest manifestation of
his spiritual powers.

**Predicting his passing away**

Here they saw the fulfilment of his prophecies about his own end: \"I
shall make the whole thing public before I go.\" \"When people in large
numbers come to know and whisper about the greatness of this body, then
the Mother will take it back.\" \"The devotees will be sifted into inner
and outer circles toward the end.\" And so on. Here he predicted that a
band of young disciples, with Narendranath as their leader, would in due
course renounce the world and devote themselves to the realization of
God and the service of humanity.

The main building at Cossipore had two storeys, with three rooms below
and two above. The Master occupied the central hall of the upper storey;
a small room to the left was used at night by his attendants. To the
right of the hall was an open balcony where Sri Ramakrishna sometimes
sat or walked. On the ground floor, a hall just below the Master\'s and
a small room to the right of it were used by the devotees, and a small
room to the extreme left was occupied by the Holy Mother. In the garden
compound were some outbuildings, two reservoirs, and pleasant walks. Sri
Ramakrishna breathed more freely in the open air of the new place.

**The companion of devotees**

Almost all the devotees had gathered by this time. They had started
coming to him in 1881. By the end of 1884 Sarat and Śaśi had become
known to the Master, and since their college examinations in the middle
of 1885 they had been visiting him almost daily. Girish Ghosh had first
met the Master in September 1884 at the Star Theatre. Since the
beginning of the following December he had been a constant visitor. And
it was during the latter part of December 1884 that Sarada Prasanna
first visited the Master at the Dakshineswar temple. Subodh and Kshirode
first visited him in August 1885.

The young devotees had taken up their quarters at the garden house to
tend Sri Ramakrishna, although many of them visited their own homes
every now and then. The householders came to see the Master almost every
day, and some of them occasionally spent the night.

**Master\'s love for devotees**

On the morning of December 23 Sri Ramakrishna gave unrestrained
expression to his love for the devotees. He said to Niranjan, \"You are
my father: I shall sit on your lap.\" Touching Kalipada\'s chest, he
said, \"May your inner spirit be awakened!\" He stroked Kalipada\'s chin
affectionately and said, \"Whoever has sincerely called on God or
performed his daily religious devotions will certainly come here.\" In
the morning two ladies received his special blessing. In a state of
samādhi he touched their hearts with his feet. They shed tears of joy.
One of them said to him, weeping, \"You are so kind!\" His love this day
really broke all bounds. He wanted to bless Gopal of Sinthi and said to
a devotee, \"Bring Gopal here.\"

It was evening. Sri Ramakrishna was absorbed in contemplation of the
Mother of the Universe. After awhile he began to talk very softly with
some of the devotees. Kāli, Chunilal, M., Navagopal, Śaśi, Niranjan, and
a few others were present.

MASTER (to M.): \"Buy a stool for me. What will it cost?\"

M: \"Between two and three rupees.\"

MASTER: \"If a small wooden seat costs only twelve *ānnās*, why should
you have to pay so much for a stool?\"

M: \"Perhaps it won\'t cost so much.\"

MASTER: \"Tomorrow is Thursday. The latter part of the afternoon is
inauspicious. Can\'t you come before three o\'clock?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. I shall.\"

MASTER: \"Well, can you tell how long it will take me to recover from
this illness?\"

1.  \"It has been aggravated a little and will take some days.\" MASTER:
    \"How long?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Perhaps five to six months.\"

Hearing this, Sri Ramakrishna became impatient, like a child, and said:
\"So long? What do you mean?\"

1.  \"I mean, Sir, for complete recovery:\"

**Significance of the Master\'s illness**

MASTER: \"Oh, that! I am relieved. Can you explain one thing? How is it
that in spite of all these visions, all this ecstasy and samādhi, I am
so ill?\"

1.  \"Your suffering is no doubt great; but it has a deep meaning.\"
    MASTER: \"What is it?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"A change is coming over your mind. It is being directed toward the
    formless aspect of God. Even your \'ego of Knowledge is vanishing.\'
    \"

MASTER: \"That is true. My teaching of others is coming to an end. I
cannot give any more instruction. I see that everything is Rāma Himself.
And sometimes I say to myself, \'Whom shall I teach?\' You see, because
I am living in a rented house many kinds of devotees are coming here. I
hope I shall not have to put up a \'signboard\', like Shashadhar or
Krishnaprasanna Sen, announcing my lectures.\" (The Master and M.
laugh.)

1.  \"There is yet another purpose in this illness. It is the final
    sifting of disciples. The devotees have achieved in these few days
    what they could not have realized by five years\' *tapasya*. Their
    love and devotion are growing by leaps and bounds.\"

MASTER: \"That may be true; but Niranjan went back home. (To Niranjan)
Please tell me how you feel.\"

NIRANJAN: \"Formerly I loved you, no doubt, but now it is impossible for
me to live without you.\"

1.  \"One day I found out how great these young men were.\" MASTER:
    \"Where?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Sir, one day I stood in a corner of the house at Syampukur and
    watched the devotees. I clearly saw that every one of them had made
    his way here through almost insurmountable obstacles and given
    himself over to

your service.\"

As Sri Ramakrishna listened to these words he became abstracted. He was
silent a few moments. Presently he went into samādhi.

Regaining consciousness of the outer world, he said to M.: \"I saw
everything passing from form to formlessness. I want to tell you all the
things I saw, but I cannot. Well, this tendency of mine toward the
formless is only a sign of my nearing dissolution. Isn\'t that so?\"

M. (wonderingly): \"It may be.\"

MASTER: \"Even now I am seeing the Formless Indivisible
Satchidananda-just like that. . . But I have suppressed my feelings with
great difficulty.

\"What you said about the sifting of disciples was right: this illness
is showing who belong to the inner circle and who to the outer. Those
who are living here, renouncing the world, belong to the inner circle;
and those who pay occasional visits and ask, \'How are you, sir?\'
belong to the outer circle.

\"Didn\'t you notice Bhavanāth? The other day he came to Syampukur
dressed as a bridegroom and asked me, \'How are you?\' I haven\'t seen
him since. I show him love for Narendra\'s sake, but he is not in my
thought any more.

**Different classes of devotees**

(To M.) \"When God assumes a human body for the sake of His devotees,
many of His devotees accompany Him to this earth. Some of them belong to
the inner circle, some to the outer circle, and some become the
suppliers of His physical needs.

**The great visions**

\"I experienced one of my first ecstasies when I was ten or eleven years
old, as I was going through a meadow to the shrine of Viśālākśi. What a
vision! I became completely unconscious of the outer world.

\"I was twenty-two or twenty-three when the Divine Mother one day asked
me in the Kāli temple, \'Do you want to be Akshara?\' I didn\'t know
what the word meant. I asked Haladhāri about it. He said, \'Kshara means
jiva, living being; Akshara means Paramatman, the Supreme Soul.\'

\"At the hour of the evening worship in the Kāli temple I would climb to
the roof of the kuthi and cry out: \'O devotees, where are you all? Come
to me soon! I shall die of the company of worldly people!\' I told all
this to the \'Englishmen\'. They said it was all an illusion of my mind.
\'Perhaps it is\', I said to myself, and became calm. But now it is all
coming true; the devotees are coming.

**Five suppliers of the Master\'s needs**

\"The Divine Mother also showed me in a vision the five suppliers of my
needs; first, Mathur Babu, and second, Sambhu Mallick, whom I had not
then met. I had a vision of a fair-skinned man with a cap on his head.
Many days later, when I first met Sambhu, I recalled that vision; 1
realized that it was he whom I had seen in that ecstatic state. I
haven\'t yet found out the three other suppliers of my wants. But they
were all of a fair complexion. Surendra looks like one of them.

\"When I attained this\" state of God-Consciousness, a person exactly
resembling myself thoroughly shook my Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna nerves.
He licked with his tongue each of the lotuses of the six centres, and
those drooping lotuses at once turned their faces upward. And at last
the Sahasrara lotus became full-blown.

**Master\'s foreseeing of the coming of devotees**

\"The Divine Mother used to reveal to me the nature of the devotees
before their coming. I saw with these two eyes-not in a trance-the
kirtan party of Chaitanya going from the banyan-tree to the bakul-tree
in the Panchavati. I saw Balarām in the procession and also, I think,
yourself \[meaning M.\]. Chuni\'s spiritual

consciousness and yours, too, have been awakened by frequent visits to
me. In a vision I saw that Śaśi and Sarat had been among the followers
of Christ.

\"Under the banyan-tree in the Panchavati I had a vision of a child.
Hriday said to me, \'Then a son will soon be born to you.\' I said to
him:

\'But I regard all women as mother. How can I have a son?\' That child
is Rākhāl .

\"I said to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother, since You have placed me in
this condition, provide me with a rich man. That is why Mathur served me
for fourteen years. And in how many different ways! At my request he
arranged a special store-room for the sādhus. He provided me with
carriage and palanquin. And whatever I asked him to give to anyone, he
gave. The Brahmani identified him with Prataprudra.

\"Vijay had a vision of this form \[meaning himself\]. How do you
account for it? Vijay said to me, \'I touched it exactly as I am
touching you now.\'

\"Lātu counted thirty-one devotees in all. That\'s not many. But a few
more are becoming devotees through Vijay and Kedār.

\"It was revealed to me in a vision that during my last days I should
have to live on pudding. During my present illness my wife was one day
feeding me with pudding. I burst into tears and said, \'Is this my
living on pudding near the end, and so painfully?\' \"

**Monday, January 4 1886**

It was the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of the moon. At four
o\'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room. He
told M. that Ram Chatterji had come from the Kāli temple at Dakshineswar
to inquire about his health. He asked M. whether it was now very cold at
the temple garden.

**Master and Narendra**

Narendra arrived. Now and then the Master looked at him and smiled. It
appeared to M. that that day the Master\'s love for his beloved disciple
was boundless. He indicated to M. by a sign that Narendra had wept. Then
he remained quiet. Again he indicated that Narendra had cried all the
way from home.

No one spoke. Narendra broke the silence.

NARENDRA: \"I have been thinking of going there today.\"

MASTER: \"Where?\"

NARENDRA: \"To Dakshineswar. I intend to light a fire under the bel-tree
and meditate.\"

MASTER: \"No, the authorities of the powder-magazine will not allow it.
The Panchavati is a nice place. Many sādhus have practised japa and
meditation there. But it is very cold there. The place is dark, too.\"

Again for a few moments all sat in silence.

MASTER (to Narendra, smiling): \"Won\'t you continue your studies?\"

NARENDRA (looking at the Master and M.): \"I shall feel greatly relieved
if I find a medicine that will make me forget all I have studied.\"

The elder Gopal, who was also in the room, said, \"I shall accompany
Narendra.\"

Kalipada Ghosh had brought a box of grapes for Sri Ramakrishna; it lay
beside the Master. The Master gave Narendra a few and poured the rest on
the floor for the devotees to pick up.

**Narendra\'s yearning for God**

It was evening. Narendra was sitting in a room downstairs. He was
smoking and describing to M. the yearning of his soul. No one else was
with them.

NARENDRA: \"I was meditating here last Saturday when suddenly I felt a
peculiar sensation in my heart.\"

M: \"It was the awakening of the Kundalini.\"

NARENDRA: \"Probably it was. I clearly perceived the Ida and the Pingala
nerves. I asked Hazra to feel my chest. Yesterday I saw him \[meaning
the Master\] upstairs and told him about it. I said to him: \'All the
others have had their realization; please give me some. All have
succeeded; shall I alone remain unsatisfied?\' \"

M: \"What did he say to you?\"

NARENDRA: \"He said: \'Why don\'t you settle your family affairs first
and then come to me? You will get everything. What do you want?\' I
replied, \'It is my desire to remain absorbed in samādhi continually for
three or four days, only once in a while coming down to the sense plane
to eat a little food.\' Thereupon he said to me: \'You are a very
small-minded person. There is a state higher even than that. \"All that
exists art Thou\" -it is you who sing that song.\'\"

1.  \"Yes, he always says that after coming down from samādhi one sees
    that it is God Himself who has become the universe, the living
    beings, and all that exists. The Isvarakotis alone can attain that
    state. An ordinary man can at the most attain samādhi; but he cannot
    come down from that state.\"

NARENDRA: \"He \[the Master\] said: \'Settle your family affairs and
then come to me. You will attain a state

higher than samādhi.\' I went home this morning. My people scolded me,
saying: \'Why do you wander about like a vagabond? Your law examination
is near at hand and you are not paying any attention to your studies.
You wander about aimlessly.\'\"

M: \"Did your mother say anything?\"

NARENDRA: \"No. She was very eager to feed me. She gave me venison. I
ate a little, though I didn\'t feel like eating meat.\"

M: \"And then?\"

NARENDRA: \"I went to my study at my grandmother\'s. As I tried to read
I was seized with a great fear, as if studying were a terrible thing. My
heart struggled within me. I burst into tears: I never wept so bitterly
in my life. I left my books and ran away. I ran along the streets. My
shoes slipped from my feet-I didn\'t know where. I ran past a haystack
and got hay all over me. I kept on running along the road to
Cossipore.\"

Narendra remained silent a few minutes and then resumed.

NARENDRA: \"Since reading the Viveka Chudāmani I have felt very much
depressed. In it Sankaracharya says

that only through great *tapasya* and good fortune does one acquire
these three things: a human birth, the

desire for liberation, and refuge with a great soul. I said to myself:
\'I have surely gained all these three. As a result of great *tapasya* I
have been born a human being; through great *tapasya*, again, I have the
desire for liberation; and through great *tapasya* I have secured the
companionship of such a great soul.\' \"

M: \"Ah!\"

**His intense dispassion**

NARENDRA: \"I have no more taste for the world. I do not relish the
company of those who live in the world-of course, with the exception of
one or two devotees.\"

Narendra became silent again. A fire of intense renunciation was burning
within him. His soul was restless for the vision of God. He resumed the
conversation.

NARENDRA (to M.): \"You have found peace, but my soul is restless. You
are blessed indeed.\"

M. did not reply, but sat in silence. He said to himself, \"Sri
Ramakrishna said that one must pant and pine for God; only then may one
have the vision of Him.\"

Immediately after dusk M. went upstairs. He found Sri Ramakrishna
asleep.

It was about nine o\'clock in the evening. Niranjan and Śaśi were
sitting near the Master. He was awake. Every now and then he talked of
Narendra.

MASTER: \"How wonderful Narendra\'s state of mind is! You see, this very
Narendra did not believe in the forms of God. And now you see how his
soul is panting for God! You know that story of the man who asked his
guru how God could be realized. The guru said to him: \'Come with me. I
shall show you how one can realize God.\' Saying this, he took the
disciple to a lake and held his head under the water. After a short time
he released the disciple and asked him, \'How did you feel?\' \'I was
dying for a breath of air!\' said the disciple.

\"When the soul longs and yearns for God like that, then you will know
that you do not have long to wait for His vision. The rosy colour on the
eastern horizon shows that the sun will soon rise.\"

This day Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness was worse. In spite of much
suffering he said many things about Narendra-though mostly by means of
signs.

At night Narendra left for Dakshineswar. It was very dark, being the
night of the new moon. He was accompanied by one or two devotees. M.
spent the night at the Cossipore garden. He dreamt that he was seated in
an assembly of sannyāsis.

**Tuesday, January 5, 1886**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on his bed and talking to M. No one else was
in the room. It was about four o\'clock in the afternoon.

MASTER: \"If Kshirode makes a pilgrimage to Gangasagar, then please buy
a blanket for him.\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was silent a few minutes. Then he continued.

**Devotees\' detachment from the world**

MASTER: \"Well can you tell me what is happening to these youngsters?
Some are running off to Puri, and some to Gangasagar. All have renounced
their homes. Look at Narendra! When a man is seized with the spirit of
intense renunciation, he regards the world as a deep well and his
relatives as venomous cobras.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. Life in the world is full of suffering.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, it is the suffering of hell-and that from the very moment
of birth! Don\'t you see what a trouble one\'s wife and children are?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. You yourself said: \'These youngsters have no
    relationship whatsoever with the world. They owe nothing to the
    world, nor do they expect anything from it. It is the sense of
    obligation that entangles a man in the world.\' \"

MASTER: \"Don\'t you see how Niranjan is? His attitude toward the world
is this: \'Here, take what is Thine, and give me what is mine.\' That is
all. He has no further relationship with the world. There is nothing to
pull him

from behind.

\"\'Woman and gold\' alone is the world. Don\'t you see that if you have
money you want to lay it by?\"

M. burst out laughing. Sri Ramakrishna also laughed.

1.  \"One thinks a great deal before taking the money out. (Both laugh.)
    But once you said at Dakshineswar that it is quite different if one
    is able to live in the world free from the three *Gunās*.\"

MASTER: \"Yes-like a child!\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. But it is exceedingly difficult; it requires tremendous
    power.\" Sri Ramakrishna remained silent.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Yesterday they went to Dakshineswar to meditate. I had a dream.\"
    MASTER: \"What did you dream?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"I dreamt that Narendra and some others had become sannyāsis. They
    were sitting around a lighted fire, I too was there. They were
    smoking tobacco and blowing out puffs of smoke. I told them that I
    could smell hemp.\"

MASTER: \"Mental renunciation is the essential thing. That, too, makes
one a sannyāsi.\"

Sri Ramakrishna kept silent a few minutes and then went on.

MASTER: \"But one must set fire to one\'s desires. Then alone can one
succeed.\"

1.  \"You said to the pundit of the Mārwāris from Burrabazar that you
    had the desire for bhakti. Isn\'t the desire for bhakti to be
    counted as a desire?\".

MASTER: \"No, just as Hinche greens are not to be counted as greens.
Hinche restrains the secretion of bile.

\"Well, all my joy, all my ecstasy-where are they now?\"

1.  \"Perhaps you are now in the state of mind that the Gitā describes
    as beyond the three *Gunās*. Sattva, rajas, and tamas are performing
    their own functions, and you yourself are unattached-unattached even
    to sattva.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, the Divine Mother has put me into the state of a child.
Tell me, won\'t the body live through this illness?\"

The Master and M. became silent. Narendra entered the room. He was going
home to settle his family affairs.

Since his father\'s death Narendra had been in great distress about his
mother and brothers. Now and then they had been threatened with
starvation. Narendra was the family\'s only hope: they expected him to
earn money and feed them. But Narendra could not appear for his law
examination; he was passing through a state of intense renunciation. He
was going to Calcutta that day to make some provision for the family. A
friend had agreed to lend him one hundred rupees. That would take care
of the family for three months.

NARENDRA: \"I am going home. (To M.) I shall visit Mahimacharan on the
way. Will you come with me?\"

M. did not want to go. Looking at M., Sri Ramakrishna asked Narendra,
\"Why?\"

NARENDRA: \"I am going that way; so I shall stop at Mahima\'s place and
have a chat with him.\"

Sri Ramakrishna looked at Narendra intently.

NARENDRA: \"A friend who comes here said he would lend me a hundred
rupees. That will take care of the family for three months. I am going
home to make that arrangement.\"

Sri Ramakrishna remained silent and looked at M.

M. (to Narendra): \"No; you go ahead. I shall go later.\"

**Thursday, March 11, 1886**

It was eight o\'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna was in the big
hall on the second floor. Narendra, Śaśi, M., Sarat, and the elder Gopal
were in the room. Sri Ramakrishna was lying down. Sarat stood by his bed
and fanned him. The Master was speaking about his illness.

MASTER: \"If some of you go to Dakshineswar and see Bholanath, he will
give you a medicinal oil and also tell you how to apply it.\"

THE ELDER GOPAL: \"Then we shall go for the oil tomorrow morning.\"

M: \"If someone goes this evening he can bring the oil.\"

ŚAŚI: \"I can go.\"

MASTER (pointing to Sarat): \"He may go.\"

After a time Sarat set out for Dakshineswar to get the oil from
Bholanath. The devotees, sitting around Sri Ramakrishna\'s bed, were
silent. Suddenly the Master sat up. He spoke to Narendranath.

**Brahman is beyond the *Gunās***

MASTER: \"Brahman is without taint. The three *Gunās* are in Brahman,
but It is Itself untainted by them.

\"You may find both good and bad smells in the air; but the air itself
is unaffected.

\"Sankaracharya was going along a street in Benares. An outcaste
carrying a load of meat suddenly touched him. \'What!\' said Sankara.
\'You have touched me!\' \'Revered sir,\' said the outcaste, \'I have
not touched you nor have you touched me. The Ātman is above all
contamination, and you are that Pure Ātman.\'

**Brahman and māyā**

\"Of Brahman and māyā, the Jnāni rejects māyā.

\"Māyā is like a veil. You see, I hold this towel between you and the
lamp. You no longer see the light of the lamp.\"

Sri Ramakrishna put the towel between himself and the devotees.

MASTER: \"Now you cannot see my face any more. As Ramprasad said,
\'Raise the curtain, and behold!\'

\"The bhakta, however, does not ignore māyā. He worships Mahamaya.
Taking refuge in Her, he says: \'O Mother, please stand aside from my
path. Only if You step out of my way shall I have the Knowledge of
Brahman.\' The jnanis explain away all three states-waking, dream, and
deep sleep. But the bhaktas accept them all. As long as there is the
ego, everything else exists. So long as the \'I\' exists, the bhakta
sees that it is God who has become māyā, the universe, the living
beings, and the twenty-four cosmic principles.\"

Narendra and the other devotees sat silently listening.

MASTER: \"But the theory of māyā is dry. (To Narendra) Repeat what I
said.\"

NARENDRA: \"Māyā is dry.\"

Sri Ramakrishna affectionately stroked Narendra\'s face and hands and
said: \"Your face and hands show that you are a bhakta. But the Jnāni
has different features; they are dry.

**Wicked ego and spiritualised ego**

\"Even after attaining Jnāna, the Jnāni can live in the world, retaining
Vidyā-māyā, that is to say, bhakti, compassion, renunciation, and such
virtues. This serves him, two purposes: first, the teaching of men, and
second, the enjoyment of divine bliss. If a Jnāni remains silent, merged
in samādhi, then men\'s hearts will not be illumined. Therefore
Sankaracharya kept the \'ego of Knowledge\'. And further, a Jnāni lives
as a devotee, in the company of bhaktas, in order to enjoy and drink
deep of the Bliss of God.

\"The \'ego of Knowledge\' and the \'ego of Devotion\' can do no harm;
it is the \'wicked I\' that is harmful. After realizing God a man
becomes like a child. There is no harm in the \'ego of a child\'. It is
like the reflection of a face in a mirror: the reflection cannot call
names. Or it is like a burnt rope, which appears to be a rope but
disappears at the slightest puff. The ego that has been burnt in the
fire of Knowledge cannot injure anybody. It is an ego only in name.\"

\"Returning to the relative plane after reaching the Absolute is like
coming back to this shore of a river after going to the other side. Such
a return to the relative plane is for the teaching of men and for
enjoyment-participation in the divine sport in the world.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was talking in a very low voice. Addressing the
devotees, he said: \"The body is so ill, but the mind is free from
Avidyā-māyā. Let me tell you, there is no thought in my mind of Ramlal
or home or wife. But I have been worrying about Purna, that kayastha
boy. I am not in the least anxious about the others.

\"It is God alone who has kept this Vidyā-māyā in me, for the good of
men, for the welfare of the devotees.

**No liberation for Divine Incarnations**

\"But if one retains Vidyā-māyā one comes back to this world. The
Avatars keep this Vidyā-māyā. So long as a man has even the slightest
desire, he must be born again and again. When he gets rid of all
desires, then he is liberated. But the bhaktas do not seek liberation.

\"If a person dies in Benares he attains liberation; he is not born
again. Liberation is the goal of the jnanis.\"

NARENDRA: \"The other day we went to visit Mahimacharan.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Well?\"

NARENDRA: \"I have never before met such a dry Jnāni.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"What was the matter?\"

NARENDRA: \"He asked us to sing. Gangadhar sang:

> *Radha is restored to life by hearing her Krishna\'s name*
>
> *She looks about; in front of her she sees a tamala tree.*

\"On hearing this song, Mahimacharan said: \'Why such songs here? I
don\'t care for love and all that nonsense. Besides, I live here with my
wife and children. Why all these songs here?\' \"

MASTER (to M.): \"Do you see how afraid he is?\"

**Sunday, March 14, 1886**

Sri Ramakrishna sat facing the north in the large room upstairs. It was
evening. He was very ill. Narendra and Rākhāl were gently massaging his
feet. M, sat near by. The Master, by a sign, asked him, too, to stroke
his feet. M. obeyed.

The previous Sunday the devotees had observed Sri Ramakrishna\'s
birthday with worship and prayer. His birthday the year before had been
observed at Dakshineswar with great pomp; but this year, on account of
his illness, the devotees were very sad and there was no festivity at
all.

The Holy Mother busied herself day and night in the Master\'s service.
Among the young disciples, Narendra, Rākhāl , Niranjan, Sarat, Śaśi,
Baburam, Jogin, Lātu, and Kāli had been staying with him at the garden
house. The older devotees visited him daily, and some of them
occasionally spent the night there.

That day Sri Ramakrishna was feeling very ill. At midnight the moonlight
flooded the garden, but it could wake no response in the devotees\'
hearts. They were drowned in a sea of grief. They felt that they were
living in a beautiful city besieged by a hostile army. Perfect silence
reigned everywhere. Nature was still, except for the gentle rustling of
the leaves at the touch of the south wind. Sri Ramakrishna lay awake.
One or two devotees sat near him in silence. At times he seemed to doze.

**Master\'s great suffering**

M. was seated by his side. Sri Ramakrishna asked him by a sign to come
nearer. The sight of his suffering was unbearable. In a very soft voice
and with great difficulty he said to M:

\"I have gone on suffering so much for fear of making you all weep. But
if you all say: \'Oh, there is so much suffering! Let the body die\',
then I may give up the body.\"

These words pierced the devotees\' hearts. And he who was their father,
mother, and protector had uttered these words! What could they say? All
sat in silence. Some thought, \"Is this another crucifixion-the
sacrifice of the body for the sake of the devotees?\"

It was the dead of night. Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness was taking a turn
for the worse. The devotees wondered what was to be done. One of them
left for Calcutta. That very night Girish came to the garden house with
two physicians, Upendra and Navagopal.

The devotees sat near the Master. He felt a little better and said to
them: \"The illness is of the body. That is as it should be; I see that
the body is made of the five elements.\"

Turning to Girish, he said: \"I am seeing many forms of God. Among them
I find this one also \[meaning his own form\].\"

**Monday, March 15, 1886**

About seven o\'clock in the morning Sri Ramakrishna felt a little
better. He talked to the devotees, sometimes in a whisper, sometimes by
signs. Narendra, Rākhāl , Lātu, M., Gopal of Sinthi, and others were in
the room. They sat speechless and looked grave, thinking of the
Master\'s suffering of the previous night.

**His vision of unity**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Do you know what I see right now? I see that
it is God Himself who has become all this. It seems to me that men and
other living beings are made of leather, and that it is God Himself who,
dwelling inside these leather cases, moves the hands, the feet, the
heads. I had a similar vision once before, when I saw houses, gardens,
roads, men, cattle-all made of One Substance; it was as if they were all
made of wax.

\"I see that it is God Himself who has become the block, the
executioner, and the victim for the sacrifice.\"

As he describes this staggering experience, in which he realizes in full
the identity of all within the One Being, he is overwhelmed with emotion
and exclaims, \"Ah! What a vision!\"

Immediately Sri Ramakrishna goes into samādhi. He completely forgets his
body and the outer world. The devotees are bewildered. Not knowing what
to do, they sit still.

Presently the Master regains partial consciousness of the world and
says: \"Now I have no pain at all. I am my old self again.\"

The devotees are amazed to watch this state of the Master, beyond
pleasure and pain, weal and woe.

He casts his glance on Lātu and says: \"There is Loto. He bends his
head, resting it on the palm of his hand. I see that it is God Himself
who rests his head on His hand.\"

Sri Ramakrishna looks at the devotees and his love for them wells up in
a thousand streams. Like a mother showing her tenderness to her children
he touches the faces and chins of Rākhāl and Narendra.

**Master about himself**

A few minutes later he says to M., \"If the body were to be preserved a
few days more, many people would have their spirituality awakened.\"

He pauses a few minutes.

\"But this is not to be. This time the body will not be preserved.\"

The devotees eagerly await the Master\'s next words.

\"Such is not the will of God. This time the body will not be preserved,
lest, finding me guileless and foolish, people should take advantage of
me, and lest I, guileless and foolish as I am, should give away
everything to everybody. In this Kaliyuga, you see, people are averse to
meditation and japa.\"

RĀKHĀL (tenderly): \"Please speak to God that He may preserve your body
some time more.\"

MASTER: \"That depends on God\'s will.\"

NARENDRA: \"Your will and God\'s will have become one.\"

Sri Ramakrisna remains silent. He appears to be thinking about
something.

MASTER (to Narendra, Rākhāl , and the others): \"And nothing will happen
if I speak to God. Now I see that I and the Mother have become one. For
fear of her sister-in-law, Radha said to Krishna, \'Please dwell in my
heart.\' But when, later on, she became very eager for a vision of
Krishna-so eager that her heart pined and panted for her Beloved-He
would not come out.\"

RĀKHĀL (in a low voice, to the devotees): \"He is referring to God\'s
incarnation as Gaurānga.\"

The devotees sit silently in the room. Sri Ramakrishna looks at them
tenderly. Then he places his hand on his heart He is about to speak.

MASTER (to Narendra and the others): \"There are two persons in this.
One, the Divine Mother-\"

He pauses. The devotees eagerly look at him to hear what he will say
next.

MASTER: \"Yes, One is She. And the other is Her devotee. It is the
devotee who broke his arm, and it is the devotee who is now ill. Do you
understand?\"

*Gunās*-sattva, rajas, and tamas.\'

The devotees sit without uttering a word.

MASTER: \"Alas! To whom shall I say all this? Who will understand me?\"
Pausing a few moments, he says:

\"God becomes man, an Avatār, and comes to earth with His devotees. And
the devotee leave the world with Him.\"

RĀKHĀL : \"Therefore we pray that you may not go away and leave us
behind.\"

Sri Ramakrishna smiles and says:

\"A band of minstrels suddenly appears, dances, and sings, and it
departs in the same sudden manner. They come and they return, but none
recognizes them.\"

The Master and the devotees smile.

After a few minutes he says:

\"Suffering is inevitable when one assumes a human body.

\"Every now and then I say to myself, \'May I not have to come back to
earth again!\' But there is something else. After enjoying sumptuous
feasts outside, one does not relish cheap home cooking.

\"Besides, this assuming of a human body is for the sake of the
devotees.\"

Sri Ramakrishna looks at Narendra very tenderly.

**Master teaches Narendra Brahmajnana**

MASTER (to Narendra) : \"An outcaste was carrying a load of meat.
Sankaracharya, after bathing in the

Ganges, was passing by. Suddenly the outcaste touched him. Sankara said
sharply: \'What! You touched me!\' \'Revered sir,\' he replied, \'I have
not touched you nor have you touched me. Reason with me: Are you the
body, the mind, or the buddhi? Analyse what you are. You are the Pure
Ātman, unattached and free,

unaffected by the three

\"Do you know what Brahman is like? It is like air. Good and bad smells
are carried by the air, but the air itself is unaffected.\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"He is beyond the *Gunās* and māyā-beyond both the \'māyā of
knowledge\' and the \'māyā of ignorance\'. \'Woman and gold\' is the
\'māyā of ignorance\'. Knowledge, renunciation, devotion, and other
spiritual qualities are the splendours of the \'māyā of knowledge\'.

**\"Ego of Knowledge\"**

Sankaracharya kept this \'māyā of knowledge\'; and that you and these
others feel concerned about me is also due to this \'māyā of
knowledge\'.

\"Following the \'māyā of knowledge\' step by step, one attains the
Knowledge of Brahman. This \'māyā of knowledge\' may be likened to the
last few steps of the stairs. Next is the roof. Some, even after
reaching the roof, go up and down the stairs; that is to say, some even
after realizing God, retain the \'ego of Knowledge\'. They retain this
in order to teach others, taste divine bliss, and sport with the
devotees of God.\"

NARENDRA: \"Some people get angry with me when I speak of
renunciation.\"

MASTER (in a whisper): \"Renunciation is necessary.

(Pointing to his different limbs) \"If one thing is placed upon another,
you must remove the one to get the other. Can you get the second thing
without removing the first?\"

NARENDRA: \"True, sir.\"

MASTER (in a whisper, to Narendra): \"When one sees everything filled
with God alone, does one see anything else?\"

NARENDRA: \"Must one renounce the world?\"

MASTER: \"Didn\'t I say just now: \'When one sees everything filled with
God alone, does one see anything else?\' Does one then see any such
thing as the world?

\"I mean mental renunciation. Not one of those who have come here is a
worldly person. Some of them had a slight desire-for instance, a fancy
for woman. (Rākhāl and M. smile.) And that desire has been fulfilled.\"

The Master looks at Narendra tenderly and becomes filled with love.
Looking at the devotees, he says, \"Grand!\"

With a smile Narendra asks the Master, \"What is grand?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"I see that preparations are going on for a grand
renunciation.\"

Narendra and the devotees look silently at the Master. Rākhāl resumes
the conversation.

RĀKHĀL (smiling, to the Master): \"Narendra is now beginning to
understand you rather well.\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughs and says: \"Yes, that is so. I see that many
others, too, are beginning to understand. (To M.) Isn\'t that so?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir.\" Narendra and M

Sri Ramakrishna turns his eyes to Narendra and M. and by a sign of his
finger draws the attention of the devotees to them. He first points out
Narendra and then M. Rākhāl understands the Master\'s hint and says to
him with a smile, \"Don\'t you mean that Narendra has the attitude of a
hero, and he \[meaning M.\] that of a handmaid of God?\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughs.

NARENDRA (smiling, to Rākhāl ): \"He \[meaning M.\] doesn\'t talk much
and is bashful. Is that why you say he is a handmaid of God?\"

MASTER (smiling, to Narendra): \"Well, what do you think of me?\"

NARENDRA: \"You are a hero, a handmaid of God, and everything else.\"

These words fill Sri Ramakrishna with divine emotion. He places his hand
on his heart and is about to say something.

He says to Narendra and the other devotees:

\"I see that all things-everything that exist-have come from this.\"

He asks Narendra by a sign, \"What did you understand?\"

NARENDRA: \"All created objects have come from you.\"

The Master\'s face beams with joy. He says to Rākhāl , \"Did you hear
what he said?\"

Sri Ramakrishna asks Narendra to sing. Narendra intones a hymn. His mind
is full of renunciation. He sings:

> *Unsteady is water on the lotus petal;*
>
> *Just as unsteady is the life of man.*
>
> *One moment with a sādhu is the boat*
>
> *That takes one across the ocean of this world. . . .*

Narendra has hardly finished one or two lines, when Sri Ramakrishna says
to him by a sign: \"What are you singing? That is a very insignificant
attitude, a very commonplace thing.\"

Now Narendra sings about the love of Krishna, impersonating one of His
handmaids:

> *How strange, O friend, are the rules of life and death!*
>
> *The Youth of Braja has Red away,*
>
> *And this poor maid of Braja soon will die.*
>
> *Madhava is in love with other maids*
>
> *More beautiful than I.*
>
> *Alas! He has forgotten the milkman\'s artless daughter.*
>
> *Who would ever have guessed, dear friend, that He,*
>
> *A Lover so tender, so divine,*
>
> *Could be a beggar simply for outward charm?*
>
> *I was a fool not to have seen it before;*
>
> *But carried away by His beauty,*
>
> *I yearned alone to hold His two feet to my breast.*
>
> *Now I shall drown myself in the Jamuna\'s stream,*
>
> *Or take a draught of poison, friend!*
>
> *Or I shall bind a creeper round my neck,*
>
> *Or hang myself from a young tamala tree;*
>
> *Or, failing all of these,*
>
> *Destroy my wretched self by chanting Krishna\'s name.*

Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees are greatly moved by the song. The
Master and Rākhāl shed tears of love.

Narendra is intoxicated with the love of the gopis of Braja for their
Sweetheart, Sri Krishna, and sings:

> *O Krishna! Beloved! You are mine.*
>
> *What shall I say to You, O Lord?*
>
> *What shall I ever say to You?*
>
> *Only a woman am I,*
>
> *And never fortune\'s favourite;*
>
> *I do not know what to say.*
>
> *You are the mirror for the hand,*
>
> *And You are the flower for the hair.*
>
> *O Friend, I shall make a flower of You*
>
> *And wear You in my hair;*
>
> *Under my braids I shall hide You, Friend!*
>
> *No one will see You there.*
>
> *You are the betel-leaf for the lips,*
>
> *The sweet collyrium for the eyes;*
>
> *O Friend, with You I shall stain my lips,*
>
> *With You I shall paint my eyes.*
>
> *You are the sandal-paste for the body;*
>
> *You are the necklace for the neck.*
>
> *I shall anoint myself with You,*
>
> *My fragrant Sandal-paste,*
>
> *And soothe my body and my soul.*
>
> *I shall wear You, my lovely Necklace,*
>
> *Here about my neck,*
>
> *And You will lie upon my bosom,*
>
> *Close to my throbbing heart.*
>
> *You are the Treasure in my body;*
>
> *You are the Dweller in my house.*
>
> *You are to me, O Lord,*
>
> *What wings are to the flying bird,*
>
> *What water is to the fish.*
>
> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 50**

THE MASTER AND BUDDHA

> Friday, April 9, 1886

IT WAS FIVE O\'CLOCK in the afternoon. Narendra, Kāli, Niranjan, and M.
were talking downstairs in the

Cossipore garden house.

NIRANJAN (to M.): \"Is it true that Vidyāsāgar is going to open a new
school? Why don\'t you try to secure employment there for Naren?\"

NARENDRA: \"I have had enough of service under Vidyāsāgar.\"

**Narendra\'s visit to Bodh-Gaya**

Narendra had just returned from a visit to Bodh-Gaya, where he had gone
with Kāli and Tārak. In that sacred place he had been absorbed in deep
meditation before the image of Buddha. He had paid his respects to the
Bodhi-tree, which is an offshoot of the original tree under which Buddha
attained Nirvāna.

Kāli said, \"One day at Gaya, at Mesh Babu\'s house, Narendra sang many
classical songs to the accompaniment of the Mridanga.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sat on his bed in the big hall upstairs. It was evening.
M. was alone in the room, fanning the Master. Lātu came in a little
later.

MASTER (to M.): \"Please bring a chaddar for me and a pair of slippers.

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER (to Lātu): \"The chaddar will cost ten *ānnās*, and then the
slippers. What will be the total cost?\"

LĀTU: \"One rupee and ten *ānnās*.\"

Sri Ramakrishna asked M., by a sign, to note the price.

Narendra entered the room and took a seat. Śaśi, Rākhāl , and one or two
other devotees came in. The Master asked Narendra to stroke his feet. He
also asked him whether he had taken his meal.

MASTER (smiling, to M.): \"He went there \[referring to Bodh-Gaya\].\"

**Buddha\'s doctrines**

M. (to Narendra): \"What are the doctrines of Buddha?\"

NARENDRA: \"He could not express in words what he had realized by his
*tapasya*. So people say he was an atheist.\"

MASTER (by signs): \"Why atheist? He was not an atheist. He simply could
not express his inner experiences in words.

**The meaning of Buddha**

Do you know what \'Buddha\' means? It is to become one with Bodha, Pure
Intelligence, by meditating on That which is of the nature of Pure
Intelligence; it is to become Pure Intelligence Itself.\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes, sir. There are three classes of Buddhās: Buddha, Arhat,
and Bodhisattva.\"

MASTER: \"This too is a sport of God Himself, a new *lila* of God.

*Nāsti.*

\"Why should Buddha be called an atheist? When one realizes Svarupa, the
true nature of one\'s Self, one attains a state that is something
between *Asti*, is, and *Nāsti*, is not.\"

NARENDRA (to M:): \"It is a state in which contradictions meet. A
combination of hydrogen and oxygen produces cool water; and the same
hydrogen and oxygen are used in the oxyhydrogen blowpipe.

\"In that state both activity and non-activity are Possible; that is to
say, one then performs unselfish action.

\"Worldly people, who are engrossed in sense-objects, say that
everything exists*Asti.* But the Mayavadis, the

illusionists, say that nothing exists The experience of a Buddha is
beyond both \'existence\' and \'non-

existence\'. \"

MASTER: \"This \'existence\' and \'non-existence\' are attributes of
Prakriti. The Reality is beyond both.\"

The devotees remained silent a few moments.

MASTER (to Narendra): \"What did Buddha preach?\"

NARENDRA: \"He did not discuss the existence or non-existence of God.
But he showed compassion for others all his life.

\"A hawk pounced upon a bird and was about to devour it. In order to
save the bird, Buddha gave the hawk his own flesh.\"

**Narendra\'s enthusiasm about Buddha**

Sri Ramakrishna remained silent. Narendra became more and more
enthusiastic about Buddha.

NARENDA: \"How great his renunciation was! Born a prince, he renounced
everything! If a man has nothing, no wealth at all, what does his
renunciation amount to? After attaining Buddhahood and experiencing
Nirvāna, Buddha once visited his home and exhorted his wife, his son,
and many others of the royal household to embrace the life of
renunciation. How intense his renunciation was! But look at Vyāsa\'s
conduct! He forbade his son Sukadeva to give up the world, saying, \'My
son, practise religion as a householder.\' \"

Sri Ramakrishna was silent. As yet he had not uttered a word.

NARENDRA: \"Buddha did not care for Śakti or any such thing. He sought
only Nirvāna. Ah, how intense his dispassion was! When he sat down under
the Bodhi-tree to meditate, he took this vow: \'Let my body wither away
here if I do not attain Nirvāna.\' Such a firm resolve!

\"This body, indeed, is the great enemy. Can anything be achieved
without chastising it?\"

ŚAŚI: \"But it is you who say that one develops sattva by eating meat.
You insist that one should eat meat.\"

NARENDRA: \"I eat meat, no doubt, but I can also live on rice, mere
rice, even without salt.\"

After a few minutes Sri Ramakrishna broke his silence. He asked
Narendra, by sign, whether he had seen a tuft of hair on Buddha\'s head.

NARENDRA: \"No, sir. He seems to have a sort of crown; his head seems to
be covered by strings of rudraksha beads placed on top of one another.\"

MASTER: \"And his eyes?\"

NARENDRA: \"They show that he is in samādhi.\"

**Master about himself**

Sri Ramakrishna again became silent. Narendra and the other devotees
looked at him intently. Suddenly a smile lighted his face and he began
to talk with Narendra. M. was fanning him.

MASTER (to Narendra): \"Well, here you find everything-even ordinary red
lentils and tamarind. Isn\'t that so?\"

NARENDRA: \"After experiencing all those states, you are now dwelling on
a lower plane.\"

M. (to himself): \"Yes, after realizing all those ideals, he is now
living as a bhakta, a devotee of God.\"

MASTER: \"Someone seems to be holding me to a lower plane.\"

**Master\'s vision of God**

Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna took the fan from M.\'s hand and said: \"As
I see this fan, directly before me, in exactly the same manner have I
seen God. And I have seen- \" With these words he placed his hand on his
heart and asked Narendra, by a sign, \"Can you tell me what I said?\"

NARENDRA: \"I have understood.\"

MASTER: \"Tell me.\"

NARENDRA: \"I didn\'t hear you well\"

Sri Ramakrishna said again, by a sign, \"I have seen that He and the one
who dwells in my heart are one and the same Person.\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes, yes! Soham-I am He.\"

MASTER: \"But only a line divides the two-that I may enjoy divine
bliss.\"

NARENDRA (to M.): \"Great souls, even after their own liberation, retain
the ego and experience the pleasure and pain of the body that they may
help others to attain liberation.

\"It is like coolie work. We perform coolie work under compulsion, but
great souls do so of their own sweet pleasure.\"

Again all fell into silence. After a time Sri Ramakrishna resumed the
conversation.

MASTER (to Narendra and the others): \"The roof is clearly visible; but
it is extremely hard to reach it.\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"But if someone who has already reached it drops down a rope,
he can pull another person up.

**Different kinds of samādhi**

\"Once a sādhu from Hrishikesh came to Dakshineswar. He said to me:
\'How amazing! I find five kinds of samādhi manifested in you.\'

\"Just as a monkey climbs a tree, jumping from one branch to another, so
also does the *Mahāvāyu*, the Great Energy, rise in the body, jumping
from one centre to another, and one goes into samādhi. One feels the
rising of the Great Energy, as though it were the movement of a monkey.

\"Just as a fish darts about in the water and roams in great happiness,
so also does the *Mahāvāyu* move upward in the body, and one goes into
samādhi. One feels the rising of the Great Energy, as though it were the
movement of a fish.

\"Like a bird hopping from one branch to another, the *Mahāvāyu* goes up
in the tree of the body, now to this branch and now to that. One feels
the rising of the Great Energy, as though it were the movement of a
bird.

\"Like the slow creeping of an ant, the *Mahāvāyu* rises from centre to
centre. When it reaches the Sahasrara one goes into samādhi. One feels
the rising of the Great Energy, as though it were the movement of an
ant.

\"Like the wriggling of a snake, the *Mahāvāyu* rises in a zigzag way
along the spinal column till it reaches the Sahasrara, and one goes into
samādhi. One feels. the rising of the Great Energy, as though it were
the movement of a snake.\"

RĀKHĀL (to the other devotees): \"Let us stop here. He has already
talked a great deal. It will aggravate his illness.\"

**Monday, April 12, 1886**

About five o\'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the
bed in his room in the Cossipore garden house. Śaśi and M. were with
him. He asked M., by a sign, to fan him. There was a fair in the
neighbourhood in celebration of the last day of the Bengali year. A
devotee, whom Sri Ramakrishna had sent to the fair to buy a few
articles, returned. \"What have you bought?\" the Master asked him.

DEVOTEE: \"Candy for five pice, a spoon for two pice, and a
vegetable-knife for two pice.\"

MASTER: \"What about the penknife?\"

DEVOTEE: \"I couldn\'t get one for two pice.\"

MASTER (eagerly): \"Go quickly and get one!\"

M. was pacing the garden. Narendra and Tārak returned from Calcutta.
They had visited Girish Ghosh\'s house and other places.

TĀRAK: \"We have eaten a great deal of meat and other heavy stuff
today.\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes, our minds have come down a great deal. Let us practise
*tapasya*. (To M.) What slavery to body and mind! We are just like
coolies-as if this body and mind were not ours but belonged to someone
else.\"

In the evening lamps were lighted in the house. Sri Ramakrishna sat on
his bed, facing the north. He was absorbed in contemplation of the
Mother of the Universe. A few minutes later Fakir, who belonged to the
priestly family of Balarām, recited the Hymn of Forgiveness addressed to
the Divine Mother. Śaśi, M., and two or three other devotees were in the
room. After the recital Sri Ramakrishna, with folded hands, very
respectfully bowed to the Deity.

M. was fanning Sri Ramakrishna. The Master said to him by signs, \"Get a
stone cup for me that will hold a quarter of a seer of milk-white
stone.\" He drew the shape of the cup with his finger.

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"When eating from other cups I get the smell of fish.\"

**Tuesday, April 13, 1886**

It was about eight o\'clock in the morning. M. had spent the night at
the garden house.

After taking his bath in the Ganges he prostrated himself before Sri
Ramakrishna. Ram had just come. He saluted the Master and took a seat.
He had brought a garland of flowers, which he offered to the Master.
Most of the devotees were downstairs; only one or two were in the
Master\'s room.

Sri Ramakrishna was talking to Ram.

MASTER: \"How do you find me?\"

RAM: \"In you one finds everything. \"Presently there will be a
discussion about your illness.\"

The Master smiled and asked Ram by a sign, \"Will there really be a
discussion about my illness?\"

Sri Ramakrishna\'s slippers were not comfortable. Dr. Rajendra Dutta
intended to buy a new pair and had asked for the measurement of his
feet. The measurement was taken.

\"Sri Ramakrishna asked M., by a sign, about the stone cup. M. at once
stood up. He wanted to go to Calcutta for the cup.

MASTER: \"Don\'t bother about it now.\"

M: \"Sir, these devotees are going to Calcutta. I will go with them.\"

M. bought the cup in Calcutta and returned to Cossipore at noon. He
saluted the Master and placed the cup near him. Sri Ramakrishna took the
cup in his hand and looked at it. Dr. Rajendra Dutta, Dr. Sreenāth,
Rākhāl

1.  Haldār, and several others came in. Rākhāl , Śaśi, and the younger
    Naren were in the room. The physicians heard the report of the
    Master\'s illness. Dr. Sreenath had a copy of the Gitā in his hand.

DR. SREENATH (to his friends): \"Everything is under the control of
Prakriti. Nobody can escape the fruit of past action. This is called
*Prārabdha*.\"

**Power of God\'s name**

MASTER: \"Why, if one chants the name of God, meditates on Him, and
takes refuge in Him-\"

DR. SREENATH: \"But, sir, how can one escape *Prārabdha*, the effect of
action performed in previous births?\"

MASTER: \"No doubt a man experiences a little of the effect; but much of
it is cancelled by the power of God\'s name. A man was born blind of an
eye. This was his punishment for a certain misdeed he had committed in
his past birth, and the punishment was to remain with him for six more
births. Be, however, took a bath in the Ganges, which gives one
liberation. This meritorious action could not cure his blindness, but it
saved him from his future births.\"

DR. SREENATH: \"But, sir, the scriptures say that nobody can escape the
fruit of karma.\"

Dr. Sreenāth was ready to argue with the Master.

MASTER (to M.): \"Why don\'t you tell him that there is a great
difference between the Isvarakoti and an ordinary man? An Isvarakoti
cannot commit sin. Why don\'t you tell him that?\"

M. remained silent and then said to Rākhāl , \"You tell him.\"

After a few minutes the physicians left the room. Sri Ramakrishna was
talking to Rākhāl Haldar.

HALDAR: \"Dr. Sreenath studies Vedānta. He is a student of the
Yoga-vasishtha.\"

MASTER: \"A householder should not hold the view that everything is
illusory, like a dream.\"

Referring to a man named Kalidas, a devotee said, \"He too discusses
Vedānta, but he has lost all his money in lawsuits.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, one proclaims everything to be māyā, and still
one goes to court! (To Rākhāl )

> Mukherji of Janai, too, talked big. But at last he came to his senses.
> If I were well I should have talked a little more with Dr. Sreenath.
> Can one obtain jnāna just by talking about it?\"
>
> HALDAR: \"You are right, sir. I have seen enough of jnāna. Now all I
> need in order to live in the world is a little bhakti. The other day I
> came to you with a problem on my mind, and you solved it.\"
>
> MASTER (eagerly): \"What was it?\"
>
> HALDAR: \"Sir, when that boy (pointing to the younger Naren) came in,
> you said he had controlled his passions.\"
>
> MASTER: \"Yes, it is true. He is totally unaffected by worldliness. He
> says he doesn\'t know what lust is. (To M.) Just feel my body. All the
> hair is standing on end.\"
>
> The Master\'s hair actually stood on end at the thought of a pure mind
> totally devoid of lust. He always said that God manifests Himself
> where there is no lust.
>
> Rākhāl Haldar took his leave.
>
> Sri Ramakrishna was seated with the devotees. A crazy woman had been
> troubling everybody in order to see the Master. She had assumed toward
> him the attitude of a lover and often ran into the garden house and
> burst into the Master\'s room. She had even been beaten by the
> devotees; but that did not stop her.
>
> ŚAŚI: \"If she comes again I shall shove her out of the place!\"
>
> MASTER (tenderly): \"No, no! Let her come and go away.\"
>
> RĀKHĀL : \"At the beginning I too used to feel jealous of others when
> they visited the Master. But he graciously revealed to me that my guru
> is also the Guru of the Universe. Has he taken this birth only for a
> few of us?\"
>
> ŚAŚI: \"I don\'t mean that. But why should she trouble him when he is
> ill? And she is such a nuisance!\"
>
> RĀKHĀL : \"We all give him trouble. Did we all come to him after
> attaining perfection? Haven\'t we caused him suffering? How Narendra
> and some of the others behaved in the beginning! How they argued with
> him!\"
>
> ŚAŚI: \"Whatever Narendra expressed in words he carried out in his
> actions.\"
>
> RĀKHĀL : \"How rude Dr. Sarkar has been to him! No one is guiltless,
> if it comes to that.\"
>
> MASTER (to Rākhāl , tenderly): \"Will you eat something?\"
>
> RĀKHĀL : \"Not now. Later on.\"
>
> Sri Ramakrishna asked M., by a sign, whether he was going to have his
> meal there.
>
> RĀKHĀL (to M.): \"Please take your meal here. He is asking you to.\"
>
> Sri Ramakrishna was seated completely naked. He looked like a
> five-year-old boy. Just then the crazy woman climbed the stairs and
> stood near the door.

1.  (in a low voice, to Śaśi): \"Ask her to salute him and go away.
    Don\'t make any fuss.\" Śaśi took her downstairs.

> It was the first day of the Bengali year. Many woman devotees arrived.
> They saluted Sri Ramakrishna and the Holy Mother. Among them were the
> wives of Balarām and Manomohan, and the brahmani of Baghbazar. Several
> of them had brought their children along.

Some of the women offered flowers at the Master\'s feet. Two young
girls, nine or ten years of age, sang a few songs.

First they sang:

> *We moan for rest, alas! but rest can never find;*
>
> *We know not whence we come, nor where we float away.*
>
> *Time and again we tread this round of smiles and tears;*
>
> *In vain we pine to know whither our pathway leads,*
>
> *And why we play this empty play. . . .*

Then:

> *There comes Radha, and there see your Krishna,*
>
> *With arching eyes and the flute at His lips.. . .*

And finally:

> *O tongue, always repeat the name of Mother Durga! Who but your Mother
> Durga will save you in distress? . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna said by a sign: \"That\'s good! They are singing of the
Divine Mother.\" The Brahmani of Baghbazar had the nature of a child.
Sri Ramakrishna told Rākhāl , by a sign, to ask her to sing. The
devotees smiled as the brahmani sang:

> *O Hari, I shall sport with You today;*
>
> *For I have found You alone in the Nidhu wood. . .*

The woman devotees went downstairs.

It was afternoon. M. and a few other devotees were seated near the
Master. Narendra came in. He looked, as the Master used to say, like an
unsheathed sword.

Narendra sat down near the Master and within his hearing expressed his
utter annoyance with women. He told the devotees what an obstacle women
were in the path of God-realization.

Sri Ramakrishna made no response. He listened to Narendra.

Narendra said again: \"I want peace. I do not care even for God.\"

Sri Ramakrishna looked at him intently without uttering a word. Now and
then Narendra chanted, \"Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, the Infinite.\"

It was eight o\'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna sat on his bed. A
few devotees sat on the floor in front of him. Surendra arrived from his
office. He carried in his hands four oranges and two garlands of
flowers. Now he looked at the Master and now at the devotees. He
unburdened his heart to Sri Ramakrishna.

**Surendra\'s faith**

SURENDRA (looking at M, and the others): \"I have come after finishing
my office work. I thought, \'What is the good of standing on two boats
at the same time?\' So I finished my duties first and then came here.
Today is the first day of the year; it is also Tuesday, an auspicious
day to worship the Divine Mother. But I didn\'t go to Kalighat. I said
to myself,\' \'It will be enough if I see him who is Kāli Herself, and
who has rightly understood Kāli.\' \"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled.

SURENDRA: \"It is said that a man should bring fruit and flowers when
visiting his guru or a holy man. So I have brought these. . . . . (To
the Master) I am spending all this money for you. God alone knows my
heart. Some people feel grieved to give away a penny; and there are
people who spend a thousand rupees without feeling any hesitation. God
sees the inner love of a devotee and accepts his offering.\"

Sri Ramakrishna said to Surendra, by a nod, that he was right.

SURENDRA: \"I couldn\'t come here yesterday. It was the last day of the
year. But I decorated your picture with flowers.\"

Sri Ramakrishna said to M., by a sign, \"Ah, what devotion!\"

SURENDRA: \"As I was coming here I bought these two garlands for four
*ānnās*.

Almost all the devotees took their leave. The Master asked M. to stroke
his legs and fan him.

**Friday, April 16, 1886**

The moon was shining brilliantly, flooding the garden paths, the trees,
and the water of the lake with its white rays. Girish, M., Lātu, and a
few other devotees were seated on the steps leading to the lake. The
house stood to the west of the lake. A lamp burnt in the Master\'s room
on the second floor. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on his bed. There were
several devotees in the room.

A few minutes later Girish and M. were strolling along a garden path
lined with flowering plants and fruit-trees.

M: \"How beautiful this moonlight is! Perhaps nature has had the same
laws from time out of mind.\"

GIRISH: \"How do you know that?\"

1.  \"There is no change in the through the telescope. There are

uniformity of nature. European scientists have been discovering new
stars mountains on the moon; they have seen them.\"

GIRISH: \"It is difficult to be sure of that. It is hard for me to
believe it.\"

M: \"Why? The mountains have been observed through the telescope.\"

GIRISH: \"How can you be sure that they have been rightly observed?
Suppose there are other things between the moon and the earth. Light
passing through them may conjure up such visions.\"

Narendra, Rākhāl , Niranjan, Sarat, Śaśi, Baburam, Kāli, Jogin, Lātu,
and a few other young devotees had been living at the Cossipore garden
house in order to nurse Sri Ramakrishna. That evening Narendra, Kāli,
and Tārak had gone to Dakshineswar. They were going to spend the night
in the Panchavati, meditating on God.

Girish, Lātu, and M. went to Sri Ramakrishna\'s room and found him
sitting on the bed. Śaśi and one or two devotees had been tending the
Master. Baburam, Niranjan, and Rākhāl also entered the room. It was a
large room. Some medicines and a few other accessories were kept near
the bed. One entered the room by a door at the north end.

Since Sri Ramakrishna had to be tended all night, the devotees stayed
awake by turns. The devotee who tended him fixed Sri Ramakrishna\'s
mosquito net and then either lay on a mat on the floor or spent the
night sitting up. Since Sri Ramakrishna got very little sleep on account
of his illness, his attendant, too, slept very little.

**Master\'s love for Girish**

That evening Sri Ramakrishna was somewhat better. The devotees saluted
the Master and sat down on the floor. The Master asked M. to bring the
lamp near him. He greeted Girish cordially.

MASTER (to Girish): \"Are you quite well? (To Lātu) Prepare a smoke for
him and give him a betel-leaf.\"

A few minutes afterwards he asked Lātu to give Girish some refreshments.
Lātu said that they had been sent for.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting up. A devotee offered him some garlands of
flowers. Sri Ramakrishna put them around his neck one by one. Was he
thus worshipping God who dwelt in his heart? The devotees looked at him
wonderingly. He took two garlands from his neck and gave them to Girish.

Every now and then Sri Ramakrishna asked whether the refreshments had
been brought.

M. was fanning the Master. On the bed was a sandal-wood-fan, the
offering of a devotee. The Master gave it to M., who continued to fan
him with it. He also gave M. two garlands.

M. had lost a son aged seven or eight about a year and a half before.
The child had seen the Master many a time. Lātu was telling Sri
Ramakrishna about M.

LĀTU: \"M. wept bitterly last night at the sight of some books that had
belonged to his dead child. His wife is almost mad with grief. She
sometimes treats her other children violently. She creates a scene at
home because he spends the night here now and then.\"

Sri Ramakrishna seemed worried to hear of this.

GIRISH: \"It is nothing to be wondered at. Even after receiving the
instruction of the Bhagavad Gitā, Arjuna fainted from grief at the death
of his son Abhimanyu.\"

Girish was given the refreshments on a tray. Sri Ramakrishna took a
grain and Girish accepted the rest as Prasad. He sat in front of the
Master and began to eat. He needed water to drink. There was an earthen
jug in the southeast corner of the room. It was the month of April, and
the day was hot. Sri Ramakrishna said, \"There is some nice water
here.\"

The Master was so ill that he had not enough strength even to stand up.
And what did the disciples see to their utter amazement? They saw him
leave the bed, completely naked, and move toward the jug! He himself was
going to pour the water into a tumbler. The devotees were almost frozen
with fear. The Master poured the water into a glass. He poured a drop or
two into his hand to see whether it was cool. He found that it was not
very cool; but since nothing better could be found, he reluctantly gave
it to Girish.

Girish was eating the sweets. The devotees were sitting about, and M.
was fanning Sri Ramakrishna.

GIRISH (to the Master): \"Deben Babu has decided to renounce the
world.\"

On account of his illness Sri Ramakrishna could hardly talk. Touching
his lips with his finger, he asked Girish, by signs, \"Who will feed his
wife and children?\"

GIRISH: \"I don\'t know.\"

The other devotees remained silent. Girish began talking again while he
ate the refreshments.

GIRISH: \"Sir, which is wiser-to renounce the world regretfully, or to
call on God, leading a householder\'s life?\"

MASTER (to M.): \"Haven\'t you read the Gitā? One truly realizes God if
one performs one\'s worldly duties in a detached spirit, if one lives in
the world after realizing that everything is illusory.

\"Those who regretfully renounce the world belong to an inferior class.

\"Do you know what a householder Jnāni is like? He is like a person
living in a glass house. He can see both inside and outside.\"

Again there was silence in the room.

MASTER (to M.): \"The refreshments are hot and good.\"

M. (to Girish): \"Yes, they were bought from Fagu\'s shop. The place is
famous.\"

MASTER (smiling) \"Yes, famous.\"

GIRISH: \"They are really nice.

(To the Master) \"Sir, my mind is now on a very lofty plane. Why does it
come down again?\"

**Nature of the mind**

MASTER: \"That always happens when one leads a worldly life. sometimes
the householder\'s mind goes up; sometimes it goes down. Sometimes he
feels a great deal of devotion; sometimes he feels less. This happens
because he lives in the midst of \'woman and gold\'.

**Monks and householders**

Sometimes a householder contemplates God or chants His name, and
sometimes he diverts his mind to \'woman and gold\'. He is like an
ordinary fly, which now sits on a sweetmeat and now on filth or rotting
sores.

\"But it is quite different with sannyāsis. They are able to fix their
minds on God alone, completely withdrawing them from \'woman and gold\'.
They can enjoy the Bliss of God alone. A man of true renunciation cannot
enjoy anything but God. He leaves any place where people talk of worldly
things; he listens only to spiritual talk. A man of true renunciation
never speaks about anything but God. The bees light only on flowers, in
order to sip honey; they do not enjoy anything else.\"

Girish went to the small terrace to rinse his hands.

MASTER (to M.): \"A man needs the grace of God to fix his whole mind on
Him. Well, Girish has eaten a great many sweets. Tell him not to eat
anything else tonight.\"

Girish returned to the room and sat in front of the Master. He was
chewing a betel-leaf.

**About Rākhāl**

MASTER (to Girish): \"Rākhāl has now understood what is good and what is
bad, what is real and what is unreal. He lives with his family, no
doubt, but he knows what it means. He has a wife. And a son has been
born to him. But he has realized that all these are illusory and
impermanent. Rākhāl will never be attached to the world.

\"He is like a mudfish. The fish lives in the mud, but there is not the
slightest trace of mud on its body.\"

GIRISH: \"Sir, I don\'t understand all this. You can make everyone pure
and unattached if you want to. You can make everyone good, whether he is
a worldly man or a sannyāsi. The Malaya breeze, I believe, turns all
trees into sandal-wood.\"

MASTER: \"Not unless there is substance in them. There are a few trees,
the cotton-tree for instance, which are not turned into sandal-wood.\"

GIRISH: \"I don\'t care.\"

MASTER: \"But this is the law.\"

GIRISH: \"But everything about you is illegal.\"

The devotees were listening to this conversation in great amazement.
Every now and then, the fan in M.\'s hand stopped moving.

MASTER: \"Yes, that may be true. When the river of bhakti overflows, the
land all around is flooded with water to the depth of a pole.

\"When a man is inebriated with divine love, he doesn\'t abide by the
injunctions of the Vedas. He picks *Durva* grass for the worship of the
Deity, but he doesn\'t clean it. He picks whatever he lays his hands on.
While gathering tulsi-leaves he even breaks the branches. Ah! what state
of mind I passed through!

(To M.) \"When one develops love of God, one needs nothing else.\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"But a devotee must assume toward God, a particular attitude.
God in His Incarnation as Rāma demonstrated Śānta, Dāsya, Vātsalya, and
sakhya. But Krishna demonstrated Madhur, besides all these.

**Radha\'s love for Krishna**

\"Radha cherished the attitude of Madhur toward Krishna. Her love was
romantic. But in the case of Sita it was the pure love of a chaste wife
for her husband. There was no romance in her love.

\"But all this is the lila of God. He demonstrates different ideals to
suit different times.\"

**The crazy woman**

A crazy woman used to accompany Vijay Goswami to the Kāli temple at
Dakshineswar and sing for Sri Ramakrishna. Her songs were about Kāli.
She also used to sing the songs of the Brahmo Samaj. The devotees called
her *\"Pagli\"* and tried to keep her away from the Master.

MASTER (to Girish and the others): *\"Pagli* cherishes the attitude of
Madhur toward me. One day she came to Dakshineswar. Suddenly she burst
out crying. \'Why are you crying?\' I asked her. And she said, \'Oh, my
head is aching!\' (All laugh.) Another day I was eating when she came to
Dakshineswar. She suddenly said, \'Won\'t you be kind to me?\' I had no
idea of what was passing through her mind and went on eating. Then she
said, \'Why did you push me away mentally?\' I asked her, \'What is your
attitude?\' She said, \'Madhur.\' \'Ah!\' I said. \'But I look on all
women as manifestations of the Divine Mother. All women are mothers to
me.\' There upon she said, \'I don\'t know all that.\' Then I called
Ramlal and said to him: \'Ramlal, listen to her! What is she talking
about this 'pushing away mentally?*\'* Even now she keeps up that
attitude.\"

GIRISH: \"Blessed indeed is *Pagli*! May be she is crazy. May be she is
beaten by the devotees. But she meditates on you twenty-four hours a
day. No matter how she meditates on you, no harm can ever befall her.

\"Sir, how can I express my own feelings about it? Think what I was
before, and what I have become now by meditating on you! Formerly I was
indolent; now that indolence has turned into resignation to God.
Formerly I was a sinner; now I have become humble. What else can I
say?\"

The devotees remained silent. Rākhāl expressed his sympathy for *Pagli*.

He said: \'We all feel sorry for her. She causes so much annoyance, and
for that she suffers, too.\"

NIRANJAN (to Rākhāl ): \"You feel that way for her because you have a
wife at home. But we could kill her.\"

RĀKHĀL (sharply): \"Such bragging! How dare you utter such words before
him \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\]?\"

*Upādhis* one by one.\"

MASTER (to Girish): \"\'Woman and gold\' alone is the world. Many people
regard money as their very life-blood.

But however you may show love for money, one day, perhaps, every bit of
it will slip from your hand.

\"In our part of the country the farmers make narrow ridges around their
paddy-fields. You know what those ridges are. Some farmers make ridges
with great care all the way around their fields. Such ridges are
destroyed by the rush of the rain-water. But some farmers leave a part
of the ridge open and put sod there. The water flows through the sod,
leaving the field covered with silt after the rain. They reap a rich
harvest.

**Good use of money**

\"They alone make good use of their money who spend it for the worship
of God or the service of holy men and devotees. Their money bears fruit.

\"I cannot eat anything offered by physicians. I mean those who traffic
in human suffering. Their money is blood and pus.\"

Sri Ramakrishna mentioned two physicians in this connection.

GIRISH: \"Dr. Rajendra Dutta is a generous person. He doesn\'t accept a
penny from anybody. He gives away money in charity.\"

**Saturday, April 17, 1886**

It was the night of the full moon. For some time Narendra had been going
to Dakshineswar daily. He spent a great deal of time in the panchavati
in meditation and contemplation. This day he returned from Dakshineswar
in the evening. Tārak and Kāli were with him.

It was eight o\'clock in the evening. Moonlight and the south wind added
to the charm of the garden house. Many of the devotees were meditating
in the room downstairs. Referring to them, Narendra said to M., \"They

are shedding their

A few minutes later M. came into Sri Ramakrishna\'s room and sat down on
the floor. The Master asked him to wash his towel and the spittoon. M.
washed them in the reservoir.

**Master\'s anxiety about M.\'s wife**

Next morning Sri Ramakrishna sent for M. After taking his bath in the
Ganges and saluting the Master, he had gone to the roof. Sri Ramakrishna
asked M. to bring his grief-stricken wife to the garden house, where she
could have her meal.

The Master said to M., by a sign: \"Ask her to come. Let her stay here a
couple of days. She may bring the baby.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. It would be fine if she developed intense love of God.\"

Sri Ramakrishna again answered by signs: \"Oh, grief pushes out
devotion. And, he was such a big boy!

\"Krishnakishore had two sons. They were of the same age as Bhavanāth,
and each had two university degrees. They both died. And Krishnakishore,
Jnāni that he was, could not at first control himself. How lucky I am
that I have none!

\"Arjuna was a great Jnāni; and Krishna was his constant companion.
Nevertheless, he was completely overwhelmed with grief at the death of
his son Abhimanyu.

\"Why doesn\'t Kishori come?\"

A DEVOTEE: \"He comes to the Ganges every day for his bath.\"

MASTER: \"But why doesn\'t he come here?\"

DEVOTEE: \"I shall ask him to come, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Why doesn\'t Harish come?\"

Two young girls aged nine and ten, who belonged to M.\'s family, sang
several songs about the Divine Mother for the Master. They had sung for
him when he had visited M.\'s house at Syampukur . The Master was very
much pleased with their songs. After they had finished, they were sent
for by the devotees to sing for them downstairs.

MASTER (to M.): \"Don\'t teach the girls any more songs. It is different
if they sing spontaneously. But they will lose their modesty by singing
before anyone and everyone. It is very necessary for women to be
modest.\"

Flowers and sandal-paste were placed before the Master in a
flower-basket. He sat on his bed and worshipped himself with these
offerings. Sometimes he placed flowers and sandal-paste on his head,
sometimes on his throat, sometimes on his heart, and sometimes on his
navel.

Manomohan of Konnagar came in and took a seat after saluting the Master.
Sri Ramakrishna was still busy with the worship of his inner Self. He
put a garland of flowers on his own neck. After a while he seemed to be
pleased with Manomohan and gave him some flowers. M., too, received a
flower.

It was about nine o\'clock in the morning. The Master and M: were
talking. Śaśi was also in the room.

MASTER (to M.): \"What were Narendra and Śaśi talking about? What did
they discuss?\"

M. (to Śaśi): \"What were you talking about?\"

ŚAŚI: \"Was it Niranjan that told you about it?\"

MASTER: \"What were you discussing? I heard \'God\', \'Being\',
\'Non-being\', and so forth.\"

ŚAŚI (smiling): \"Shall I call Narendra?\"

MASTER: \"Yes.\"

Narendra came in and took a seat.

MASTER (to M.): \"Ask him something. (To Narendra) Tell us what you were
talking about.\"

NARENDRA: \"I have indigestion. What\'s there to tell you about?\"

MASTER: \"You will get over your indigestion.\"

M. (smiling): \'Tell us about the experience of Buddha.\"

NARENDRA: \"Have I become a Buddha, that you want me to talk about
him?\"

M: \"What does Buddha say about the existence of God?\"

NARENDRA: \"How can you say that God exists? It is you who have created
this universe.

Don\'t you know what Berkeley says about it?\"

M: \"Yes, I do. According to him, *esse is percipi*. The world exists as
long as the sense-organs perceive it.\"

MASTER: \" \'Nangta used to say, The world exists in mind alone and
disappears in mind alone.\' But as long as \'I-consciousness\' exists,
one should assume the servant-and-master relationship with God.\"

NARENDRA (to M:): \"How can you prove by reasoning that God exists? But
if you depend on faith, then you must accept the relationship of servant
and Master. And if you accept that-and you can\'t help it-then you must
also say that God is kind.

\"You think only of the suffering in the world-why do you forget that
God has also given you so much happiness? How kind He is to us! He has
granted us three very great things: human birth, the yearning to know
God, and the companionship of a great soul.\"

All were silent.

MASTER (to Narendra): \"I feel very clearly that there is Someone within
me.

Dr. Rajendralal arrived and took a seat. He had been treating the Master
with homeopathic medicine. When the talk about medicine was over, Sri
Ramakrishna pointed out Manomohan to the doctor.

RAJENDRA: \"He is a distant relative of mine.\"

Narendra went downstairs. He was singing to himself:

> *Lord, Thou hast lifted all my sorrow with the vision of Thy face,*
>
> *And the magic of Thy beauty has bewitched my mind;*
>
> *Beholding Thee, the seven worlds forget their never-ending woe;*
>
> *What shall I say, then, of myself, a poor and lowly soul? . . .*

Narendra had a little indigestion. He said to M.: \"If one follows the
path of bhakti, then the mind comes down a little to the body.
Otherwise, who am I? Neither man nor God. I have neither pleasure nor
pain.\"

It was about nine o\'clock in the evening. Surendra and a few other
devotees entered Sri Ramakrishna\'s room and offered him garlands of
flowers. Baburam, Lātu, and M. were also in the room. Sri Ramakrishna
put Surendra\'s garland on his own neck. All sat quietly.

Suddenly the Master made a sign to Surendra to come near him. When the
disciple came near the bed, Sri Ramakrishna took the garland from his
neck and put it around Surendra\'s. Surendra saluted the Master. Sri
Ramakrishna asked him, by a sign, to rub his feet. Surendra gave them a
gentle massage.

Several devotees were sitting on the bank of the reservoir in the
garden, singing to the accompaniment of drum and cymbals. Sri
Ramakrishna sent them word through Lātu to sing the name of Hari.

M., Baburam, and several others were still sitting in the Master\'s
room. They heard the devotees singing:

> *There dances my Gora, chanting Hari\'s name! . . .*

When the Master heard the song he made a sign to Baburam and M. to join
them. He also asked them to dance.

A few minutes later Sri Ramakrishna sent another devotee to the singers
to ask them to sing the following improvised lines: \"Ah, my Gora even
knows how to dance!\" \"How can I describe my Gora\'s moods?\" \"My Gora
dances with both his hands upraised.\"

The music was over. Surendra was almost in an ecstatic mood. He sang:

> *Crazy is my Father, crazy is my Mother,*
>
> *And I, their son, am crazy too!*
>
> *Syama is my Mother\'s name.*
>
> *My Father strikes His cheeks and makes a hollow sound:*
>
> *Ba-ba-bom! Ba-ba-bom!*
>
> *And my Mother, drunk and reeling,*
>
> *Falls across my Father\'s body!*
>
> *Syama\'s streaming tresses hang in vast disorder; Bees are swarming
> numberless About Her crimson Lotus Feet.*
>
> *Listen, as She dances, how Her anklets ring!*
>
> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 51**

THE MASTER\'S LOVE FOR HIS DEVOTEES

> Wednesday, April 21, 1886

**Narendra and M. & Narendra\'s scepticism**

M. AND NARENDRA were strolling in the garden of the house at Cossipore.
Narendra was very much worried, because he had not yet been able to
solve the financial difficulties of his family.

NARENDRA: \"I don\'t care for the job at the Vidyāsāgar School. I have
been thinking of going to Gaya. I have been told that a Zamindār there
needs the services of a manager for his estate. There is no such thing
as God.\"

M. (smiling): \"You may say that now, but later on you will talk
differently. Scepticism is a stage in the path of God-realization. One
must pass through stages like this and go much farther; only thus can
one realize God. That is what the Master says.\"

NARENDRA: \"Has anybody seen God as I see that tree?\"

1.  \"Yes, our Master has seen God that way.\" NARENDRA: \"It may be his
    hallucination.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Whatever a person experiences in a particular state is real for
    him in that state. Suppose you are dreaming that you have gone to a
    garden. As long as the dream lasts, the garden is real for you. But
    you think of it as unreal when your mind undergoes a change, as, for
    instance, when you awake. When your mind attains the state in which
    one sees God, you will know God to be real.\"

NARENDRA: \"I want truth. The other day I had a great argument with Sri
Ramakrishna himself.\"

M. (smiling): \"What happened?\"

NARENDRA: \"He said to me, \'Some people call me God.\' I replied, \'Let
a thousand people call you God, but I shall certainly not call you God
as long as I do not know it to be true.\' He said, \'Whatever many
people say is indeed truth; that is dharma.\' Thereupon I replied, \'Let
others proclaim a thing as truth, but I shall certainly not listen to
them unless I myself realize it as truth.\' \"

M. (smiling): \"Your attitude is like that of Western savants-Copernicus
and Berkeley, for instance. The whole world said it was the sun that
moved, but Copernicus did not listen. Everybody said the external world
was real, but Berkeley paid no heed. Therefore Lewis says, \'Why was
Berkeley not a philosophical Copernicus?\' \"

NARENDRA: \"Can you give me a History of Philosophy?

M: \"By whom? Lewis?\"

NARENDRA: \"No, Uberweg. I must read a German author.\"

1.  \"You just said, \'Has anybody seen God as I see that tree?\'
    Suppose God comes to you as a man and says, \'I am God.\' Will you
    believe it then? You certainly remember the story of Lazarus. After
    his death, Lazarus said to Abraham, \'Let me go back to the earth
    and tell my friends and relatives that hell and the after-life
    exist.\' Abraham replied: \'Do you think they will believe you? They
    will say it is a charlatan who is telling them such things.\' The
    Master says that God cannot be known by reasoning. By faith alone
    one attains everything-knowledge and super-knowledge. By faith alone
    one sees God and becomes intimate with Him.\"

It was about three o\'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna was in
bed. Ramlal, who had come from Dakshineswar, was massaging his feet.
Gopal of Sinthi and M. were in the room.

Sri Ramakrishna asked M. to shut the windows and massage his feet. At
the Master\'s request Purna had come to the Cossipore garden in a hired
carriage. M. was to pay the carriage hire. Sri Ramakrishna made a sign
to Gopal, asking whether he had obtained the money from M. Gopal
answered in the affirmative.

**Devotees about the Master**

At nine o\'clock in the evening Surendra, Ram, and the others were about
to return to Calcutta. It was the sultry month of April and Sri
Ramakrishna\'s room became very hot during the day; so Surendra had
brought some straw screens to keep the room cool.

SURENDRA: \"Why, nobody has hung up these straw screens. Nobody here
pays attention to anything.\"

A DEVOTEE (smiling): \"The devotees here are now in the state of
Brahmajnana. They feel, \'I am He.\' The world is unreal to them. When
they come down to a lower plane and regard God as the Master and
themselves as His servants, they will pay attention to the service of
Sri Ramakrishna.\" (All laugh.)

**Thursday, April 22, 1886**

In the evening Rākhāl , Śaśi, and M. were strolling in the garden at
Cossipore.

M: \"The Master is like a child-beyond the three *Gunās*.\"

ŚAŚI AND RĀKHĀL : \"He himself has said that.\"

RĀKHĀL : \"He sits in a tower, as it were, from which he gets all
information and sees everything; but others cannot go there and reach
him.\"

1.  \"He said, \'In such a state of mind one sees God constantly.\' In
    him there is not the slightest trace of worldliness. His mind is
    like dry fuel, which catches fire quickly.\"

ŚAŚI: \"He described the different kinds of intelligence to Charu. The
right intelligence is that through which one attains God; but the
intelligence that enables one to become a deputy magistrate or a lawyer,
or to acquire a house, is a mean intelligence. It is like thin and
watery curd, which merely soaks flattened rice but does not add any
flavour to it. It is not like thick, superior curd. But the intelligence
through which one attains God is like thick curd.\"

M: \"Ah, what wonderful words!\"

**Bliss of Brahman and bliss of the world**

ŚAŚI: \"Kāli said to the Master: \'What\'s the good of having joy? The
Bhils are joyous. Savages are always singing and dancing in a frenzy of
delight.\' \"

RĀKHĀL : \"He \[meaning the Master\] replied to Kāli: \'What do you
mean? Can the Bliss of Brahman be the same as worldly pleasure? Ordinary
men are satisfied with worldly pleasure. One cannot enjoy the Bliss of
Brahman unless one completely rids oneself of attachment to worldly
things. There is the joy of money and sense experience, and there is the
Bliss of God-realization. Can the two ever be the same? The rishis
enjoyed the Bliss of Brahman.\' \"

**Master on Buddha**

M: \"You see, Kāli nowadays meditates on Buddha; that is why he speaks
of a state beyond Bliss.\"

RĀKHĀL : \"Yes, Kāli told the Master about Buddha. Sri Ramakrishna said
to him: \'Buddha is an Incarnation of God. How can you compare him to
anybody else? As he is great, so too is his teaching great.\' Kāli said
to him: \'Everything, indeed, is the manifestation of God\'s Power. Both
worldly pleasure and the Bliss of God are the

manifestation of that Power.\' \"

M: \"What did the Master say to that?\"

RĀKHĀL : \"He said: \'How can that be? Is the power to beget a child the
same as the power through which one realizes God?\'\"

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room on the second floor. Narendra,
Rākhāl , Śaśi, Surendra, M., Bhavanāth, and other devotees were present.
Dr. Mahendra Sarkar and Dr. Rajendra Dutta were also there to examine
him. His condition was growing worse.

**On \"woman and gold\"**

The house-rent was between sixty and sixty-five rupees. Surendra bore
most of the expenses and had rented the house in his name. The other
householder devotees contributed financial help according to their
power. A cook and a maid had been engaged to look after the members of
the house-hold.

MASTER (to Dr. Sarkar and the others): \"The expenses are mounting.\"

DR. SARKAR (pointing to the devotees): \"But they are ready to bear
them. They do not hesitate to spend money. (To Sri Ramakrishna) Now, you
see, gold is necessary.\"

MASTER (to Narendra): \"Why don\'t you answer?\"

Narendra remained silent. Dr. Sarkar resumed the conversation.

DR. SARKAR: \"Gold is necessary, and also woman.\"

RAJENDRA: \"Yes, his \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\'s\] wife has been
cooking his meals.\"

DR. SARKAR (to the Master): \"Do you see?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes-but very troublesome!\"

DR. SARKAR: \"If there were no troubles, then all would become
paramahamsas.\"

MASTER: \"If a woman touches me I fall ill. That part of my body aches
as if stung by a horned fish.\"

DR. SARKAR: \"I believe that. But how can you get along without woman?\"

MASTER: \"My hand gets all twisted up if I hold money in it; my
breathing stops. But there is no harm in spending money to lead a
spiritual life in the world-if one spends it, for instance, in the
worship of God and the service of holy men and devotees.

\"A man forgets God if he is entangled in the world of māyā through a
woman. It is the Mother of the Universe who has assumed the form of
māyā, the form of woman. One who knows this rightly does not feel like
leading the life of māyā in the world. But he who truly realizes that
all women are manifestations of the Divine Mother may lead a spiritual
life in the world. Without realizing God one cannot truly know what a
woman is.\"

Sri Ramakrishna had, felt a slight improvement as a result of the
homeopathic treatment.

RAJENDRA (to the Master): \"After getting rid of this illness you must
begin to practise medicine as a homeopath. Otherwise, what\'s the use of
this human life?\" (All laugh.)

NARENDRA: \"Nothing like leather!\" (All laugh.)

A few minutes later the physicians took their leave. Sri Ramakrishna and
M. were engaged in conversation. The

Master was telling M. how he felt about woman.

MASTER (to M.): \"They say I cannot get along without \'woman and
gold\'. They don\'t understand the state of my mind.

**Sri Ramakrishna and woman**

\"If I touch a woman my hand becomes numb; it aches. If in a friendly
spirit I approach a woman and begin to talk to her, I feel as if a
barrier had been placed between us. It is impossible for me to cross
that barrier.

\"If a woman enters my room when I am alone, at once I become like a
child and regard her as my mother.\"

As M. listened to these words, he became speechless with wonder at Sri
Ramakrishna\'s exalted state of mind.

Bhavanāth and Narendra were sitting at a distance, talking together.

**Encouraging Bhavanāth**

Bhavanāth had married and was trying to find a job; so he could not
visit Sri Ramakrishna frequently at Cossipore. He had said to M.: \"I
understand that Vidyāsāgar wants to start a new school. I have to earn
my livelihood. Will it be possible for me to secure a job in that
school?\" The Master was much worried about Bhavanāth\'s being entangled
in worldly life. Bhavanāth was twenty-three or twenty four years old.

MASTER (to Narendra): \"Give him a lot of courage.\"

Narendra and Bhavanāth smiled. Sri Ramakrishna said to Bhavanāth, by
signs: \"Be a great hero. Don\'t forget yourself when you see her
weeping behind her veil. Oh, women cry so mucheven when they blow their
noses! (Narendra, Bhavanāth, and M. laugh.)

\"Keep your mind firm on God. He who is a hero lives with a woman but
does not indulge in physical pleasures. Talk to your wife only about
God.\"

A few minutes later Sri Ramakrishna said to Bhavanāth, by a sign, \"Take
your meal here today.\"

BHAVANĀTH: \"Yes, sir. I am quite all right. Don\'t worry about me.\"

Surendra came in and took a seat. The devotees offered garlands of
flowers to the Master every evening. Sri Ramakrishna put these garlands
around his neck. Surendra sat quietly in the room. Sri Ramakrishna was
in a very happy mood and gave him two garlands. Surendra saluted the
Master and put them around his neck.

All sat in silence and looked at Sri Ramakrishna. Surendra saluted the
Master again and stood up. He was about to leave. He asked Bhavanāth to
hang the straw screens over the windows.

**Hirananda**

Hirananda came in with two of his friends. He was a native of Sindh,
about twenty-two hundred miles from Calcutta. After finishing his
college education in Calcutta in 1883, he had returned to Sindh and
taken charge of editing two papers, the Sindh Times and the Sindh
Sudhar. While studying in Calcutta he had often visited Keshab Chandra
Sen and had come to know him intimately. He had met Sri Ramakrishna at
the Kāli temple at Dakshineswar and had spent an occasional night there
with the Master. Hearing of Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness, he now came to
Calcutta from Sindh to see him. The Master himself had been very eager
to see Hirananda.

Sri Ramakrishna pointed to Hirananda and said to M., by signs: \"A very
fine boy. Do you know him?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER (to Hirananda and M.): \"Please talk a little. I want to hear you
both.\"

When M. remained silent, Sri Ramakrishna asked him: \"Is Narendra here?
Call him.\"

Narendra entered the room and sat near the Master.

MASTER (to Narendra and Hirananda): \"I want to hear you two talk.\"

Hirananda was silent a few moments and then after great hesitation began
the conversation.

**Narendra argues with Hirananda**

HIRANANDA (to Narendra): \"Why does a devotee of God suffer?\" His words
were sweet as nectar. Everyone in the room could feel that his heart was
filled with love.

NARENDRA: \"The plan of the universe is devilish. I could have created a
better world.\"

HIRANANDA: \"Can one feel happiness without misery?\"

NARENDRA: \"I am not making a plan for a universe, but simply giving my
opinion of the present plan.

\"But all these problems are solved if we have faith only in one thing,
and that is Pantheism. All doubts disappear if one believes that
everything is God. God alone is responsible for all that happens.\"

HIRANANDA: \"Very easy to say that.\"

Narendra sang Sankara\'s Six Stanzas on Nirvāna:

> *Om I am neither mind, intelligence, ego, nor chitta,*
>
> *Neither ears nor tongue nor the senses of smell and sight;*
>
> *Nor am I ether, earth, fire, water, or air:*
>
> *I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*
>
> *I am neither the Prāna nor the five vital breaths,*
>
> *Neither the seven elements of the body nor its five sheaths,*
>
> *Nor hands nor feet nor tongue, nor the organs of sex and voiding:*
>
> *I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*
>
> *Neither loathing nor liking have I, neither greed nor delusion;*
>
> *No sense have I of ego or pride, neither dharma nor moksha;*
>
> *Neither desire of the mind nor object for its desiring:*
>
> *I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*
>
> *Neither right nor wrongdoing am I, neither pleasure nor pain,*
>
> *Nor the mantra, the sacred place, the Vedas, the sacrifice;*
>
> *Neither the act of eating, the eater, nor the food:*
>
> *I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*
>
> *Death or fear I have none, nor any distinction of caste;*
>
> *Neither father nor mother nor even a birth have I;*
>
> *Neither friend nor comrade, neither disciple nor guru:*

*I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*

1.  *have no form or fancy; the All-pervading am I; Everywhere I exist,
    > yet I am beyond the senses; Neither salvation am I, nor anything
    > that may be known: I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am
    > Śiva!*

HIRANANDA: \"Good!\"

SRI RAMAKRISHNA (to Hirananda, by a sign): \"Give him an answer.\"

HIRANANDA: \"It is all the same, whether you look at a room from a
corner or look at it from the middle. It is the same God-Consciousness
that one feels, whether one says, \'O God, I am Thy servant\', or, \'I
am He.\' One may enter a room by several doors.\"

**Narendra\'s spirit of renunciation**

All sat in silence. Hirananda said to Narendra, \"Please sing some
more.\"

Narendra sang the Five Stanzas on the Kaupina:

> *Roaming ever in the grove of Vedānta,*
>
> *Ever pleased with his beggar\'s morsel,*
>
> *Ever walking with heart free from sorrow,*
>
> *Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth.*
>
> *Sitting at the foot of a tree for shelter,*
>
> *Using the palms of his hands for eating,*
>
> *Wrapped in a garment fine or ugly,*
>
> *Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth.*
>
> *Satisfied fully by the Bliss within him,*
>
> *Curbing wholly the cravings of his senses,*
>
> *Contemplating day and night the Absolute Brahman,*
>
> *Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth.*

When Sri Ramakrishna heard the line, *\"Contemplating day and night the
Absolute Brahman\",* he said in a very

low voice, \"Ah!\" Then, by a sign, he said to the devotees, \"This is
the characteristic of the yogi.\"

Narendra finished the hymn:

> *Witnessing the changes of mind and body,*
>
> *Naught but the self within him beholding,*
>
> *Thinking not of outer, of inner, or of middle,*
>
> *Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth.*
>
> *Chanting \"Brahman\", the Word of redemption,*
>
> *Meditating only on \"I am Brahman\",*
>
> *Living on alms and wandering freely,*
>
> *Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth.*

Again Narendra sang:

> *Meditate on Him, the Perfect, the Embodiment of Bliss; Meditate on
> Him, the Formless, the Root of the Universe, The Hearer behind the
> ear, the Thinker behind the mind, The Speaker behind the tongue,
> Himself beyond all words: He is the Life of life, the Ultimate, the
> Adorable!*

MASTER (to Narendra): \"And that one *\'All that exists art Thou.\'* \"

Narendra sang:

> *I have joined my heart to Thee: all that exists art Thou;*
>
> *Thee only have I found, for Thou art, all that exists.*
>
> *O Lord, Beloved of my heart! Thou art the Home of all;*
>
> *Where indeed is the heart in which Thou dost not dwell?*
>
> *Thou hast entered every heart: all that exists art Thou.*
>
> *Whether sage or fool, whether Hindu or Musslman,*
>
> *Thou makest them as Thou wilt: all that exists art Thou.*
>
> *Thy presence is everywhere, whether in heaven or in Kaaba;*
>
> *Before Thee all must bow, for Thou art all that exists.*
>
> *From earth below to the highest heaven, from heaven to deepest
> earth,*
>
> *I see Thee wherever I look: all that exists art Thou.*
>
> *Pondering, I have understood; I have seen it beyond a doubt;*
>
> *I find not a single thing that may be compared to Thee.*
>
> *To Jafar it has been revealed that Thou art all that exists.*

As the Master listened, to the line, *\"Thou hast entered every
heart\",* he said by a sign: \"God dwells in everybody\'s heart. He is
the Inner Guide.\"

As Narendra sang the line, *\"I see Thee wherever I look: all that
exists art Thou\",* Hirananda said to him: \"Yes, \'All

that exists art Thou.\' Now you say: \'Thou! Thou! Not I, but Thou!\'\"

NARENDRA: Give me a one and I\'ll give you a million. Thou art I; I am
Thou. Nothing exists but I \"

Narendra recited a few verses from the Ashtāvakra Samhitā. The room
again became silent.

MASTER (to Hirananda, pointing to Narendra): \"He seems to be walking
with an unsheathed sword in his hand. (To M., pointing to Hirananda) How
quiet! Like a cobra, quiet before the charmer, with its hood spread.\"

Sri Ramakrishna fell into an inward mood. Hirananda and M. were seated
near him. There was complete silence in the room. The Master\'s body was
being racked with indescribable pain. The devotees could not bear the
sight of this illness; but somehow the Master made them forget his
suffering. He sat there, his face beaming as if there were no trace of
illness in his throat. The devotees had placed flowers and garlands
before him as their loving offerings. He picked up a flower and touched
with it first his head, then his throat, heart, and navel. To the
devotees he seemed a child playing with flowers.

Sri Ramakrishna used to tell the devotees that his divine visions and
moods were accompanied by the rising of a spiritual current inside his
body.

Now he talked to M.

MASTER: \"I don\'t remember when the current went up. Now I am in the
mood of a child. That is why I am playing with the flowers this way.

**Master\'s exalted vision**

Do you know what I see now? I see my body as a frame made of bamboo
strips and covered with a cloth. The frame moves. And it moves because
someone dwells inside it.

\"Again, I see the body to be like a pumpkin with the seeds scooped out.
Inside this body there is no trace of passion or worldly attachment. It
is all very clean inside, and- \"

It became very painful for Sri Ramakrishna to talk further. He felt very
weak. M. quickly guessed what the Master wanted to tell the devotees,
and said, \"And you are seeing God inside yourself.\"

MASTER: \"Both inside and outside. The Indivisible Satchidananda-I see
It both inside and outside. It has merely assumed this sheath \[meaning
his body\] for a support and exists both inside and outside. I clearly
perceive this.\"

M. and Hirananda listened intently to these words about his exalted
state of God-Consciousness. A few moments later Sri Ramakrishna looked
at them and resumed the conversation.

MASTER: \"You all seem to me to be my kinsmen. I do not look on any of
you as a stranger.

\"I see you all as so many sheaths, and the heads are moving.

\"I notice that when my mind is united with God the suffering of the
body is left aside.

\"No I perceive only this: the Indivisible Satchidananda is covered with
skin, and this sore in the throat is on one side of it.\"

The Master again fell silent. A few minutes later he said: \"The
attributes of matter are superimposed on Spirit, and the attributes of
Spirit are superimposed on matter. Therefore when the body is ill a man
says, \'I am ill.\' \"

Hirananda wanted to understand what the Master had just said; so M. told
him, \"Then hot water scalds the hand, people say that the water scalds;
but the truth is that it is the heat that scalds.\"

**Master and Hirananda**

HIRANANDA (to the Master): \"Please tell us why a devotee of God
suffers.\"

MASTER: \"It is the body that suffers.\"

Sri Ramakrishna seemed about to say something more. Hirananda and M.
eagerly awaited his words.

Sri Ramakrishna said, \"Do you understand?\"

M. said to Hirananda, in a whisper: \"The body suffers for the purpose
of teaching men. His life is like a book of reference. In spite of so
much physical suffering, his mind is one hundred percent united with
God.\"

HIRANANDA: \"Yes, it is like Christ\'s crucifixion. But still the
mystery remains-why should he, of all people, suffer like this?\"

M: \"The Master says it is the will of the Divine Mother. This is how
She is sporting through his body.\"

The two devotees were talking in whispers. Sri Ramakrishna asked
Hirananda, by a sign, what

M. was talking about. Since Hirananda could not understand the sign, Sri
Ramakrishna repeated it.

HIRANANDA: \"He says that your illness is for the teaching of men.\"

MASTER: \"But that\'s only his guess.

(To M. and Hirananda) \"My mood is changing. I think that I should not
say to everyone, \'May your spiritual consciousness be awakened.\'
People are so sinful in the Kaliyuga; if I awaken their spiritual
consciousness I shall have to accept the burden of their sins.\"

M. (to Hirananda): \"He will not awaken people\'s spiritual
consciousness except at the right time. When a person is ready, he will
awaken his spiritual consciousness.\"

**Friday, April 23, 1886**

It was Good Friday. Hirananda had taken his midday meal at the Cossipore
garden house. About one o\'clock in the afternoon he was stroking Sri
Ramakrishna\'s feet. M. sat near by. Lātu and one or two other devotees
were going in and out of the room. It was the Master\'s earnest desire
that Hirananda should stay for some time at the Cossipore garden house.

While massaging the Master\'s feet, Hirananda conversed with him. He
spoke in a very sweet voice, as if trying to console a child.

HIRANANDA: \"Why should you worry so much? You can enjoy peace of mind
if you have faith in the physician. You are a child.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"How can I have faith in the doctor? Dr. Sarkar said
that I would not recover.\"

HIRANANDA: \"But why should you worry so much about that? What is to
happen must happen.\"

M. (to Hirananda, aside): \"He is not worrying about himself. The
preservation of his body is for the welfare of the devotees.\"

It was a sultry day and the room became very hot at noontime. The straw
screens had been hung over the windows. Hirananda adjusted them. The
Master looked at him.

MASTER (to Hirananda): \"Please don\'t forget to send the pajamas.\"

Hirananda had told Sri Ramakrishna that he would feel more comfortable
if he wore the pajamas used in Sindh.

Sri Ramakrishna was reminding him of them.

Hirananda had not eaten well. The rice had not been well cooked. The
Master felt very sorry about it and asked him again and again whether he
would have some refreshments. On account of his illness he could hardly
talk; but still he repeated the question. He said to Lātu, \"Did you too
eat that rice?\'

Sri Ramakrishna could hardly keep the cloth on his body. He was almost
always naked, like a child. Hirananda had brought with him one or two of
his Brahmo friends. Therefore every now and then the Master pulled the
cloth to his waist.

MASTER (to Hirananda): \"Will you take me for an uncivilized person if I
don\'t cover my body with my cloth?\"

HIRANANDA: \"What difference does that make with you? You are but a
child.\"

MASTER (pointing to a Brahmo devotee): \"But he feels that way\"

Hirananda was about to take his leave. In a very few days he was going
to start for Sindh.

MASTER (to Hirananda): \"Suppose you don\'t go to Sindh.\"

HIRANANDA (smiling): \"But there is nobody there to do my work. I have
my duties.\"

MASTER: \"How much do you earn?\"

HIRANANDA (smiling): \"My work doesn\'t bring me a large salary.\"

MASTER: \"Still, how much?\"

Hirananda laughed.

MASTER: \"Why don\'t you live here?\"

Hirananda did not reply.

MASTER: \"Suppose you give up the job.\"

Hirananda said nothing. He was ready to take his leave.

MASTER: \"When will you see me again?\"

HlRANANDA: \"I shall leave for Sindh on Monday, the day after tomorrow I
shall see you that morning.\"

Hirananda left.

M. was seated by the Master\'s side.

MASTER (to M.): \"He is a fine young man, isn\'t he?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. He has a very sweet nature.\"

MASTER: \"He said that Sindh is twenty-two hundred miles from Calcutta;
and he has come all that way to see me.\"

1.  \"True, Sir. That would be impossible without real love.\" MASTER:
    \"He wants very much to take me to Sindh.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"The journey is very painful. It takes four or five days by
    train.\" MASTER: \"He has three university degrees.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Yes, sir.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was tired. He wanted to take a little rest. He asked M.
to open the shutters of the windows and spread the straw mat over his
bed. M. was fanning him. Sri Ramakrishna became drowsy.

After a short nap Sri Ramakrishna said to M., \"Did I sleep?\"

M: \"A little.\"

Narendra, Sarat, and M. were talking downstairs.

NARENDRA: \"How amazing it is! One learns hardly anything though one
reads books for many years. How can a man realize God by practising
*sādhanā* for two or three days? Is it so easy to realize God? (To
Sarat) You have obtained peace. M., too, has obtained it. But I have no
peace.\"

It was afternoon. Many devotees were sitting in the Master\'s room.
Narendra, Sarat, Śaśi, Lātu, Nityagopal, Girish, Ram, M., and Suresh
were present.

Kedār came in. This was his first visit to the Master for some time.
While staying in Dāccā, in connection with his official duties, he had
heard of Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness. On entering Sri Ramakrishna\'s room
he took the dust of the Master\'s feet on his head and then joyously
gave it to the others. The devotees accepted it with bowed heads. As he
offered it to Sarat, the latter himself took the dust of Sri
Ramakrishna\'s feet. M. smiled. The Master also smiled, looking at M.
The devotees sat without uttering a word. Sri Ramakrishna seemed about
to go into an ecstatic mood. Now and then he breathed heavily as if
trying to suppress his emotion. He said to Kedār, by a sign, \"Argue
with Girish.\"

Girish said to Kedār: \"Sir, I beg your pardon. At first I did not know
who you were. That is why I argued with you. But now it is quite
different.\"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled.

The Master drew Kedār\'s attention to Narendra and said: \"He has
renounced everything. (To the devotees) Kedār once said to Narendra,
\'You may reason and argue now, but in the end you will roll on the
ground,

chanting Hari\'s name.\' (To Narendra) Take the dust of Kedār\'s feet.\"

KEDĀR (to Narendra): \"Take the dust of his \[meaning the Master\'s\]
feet. That will do.\"

Surendra was seated behind the other devotees. The Master looked at him
with a smile and said to Kedār, \"Ah, how sweet his nature is!\" Kedār
understood the Master\'s hint and went toward Surendra.

Surendra was very sensitive. Some of the devotees had been collecting
funds from the householder devotees to meet the expenses of the
Cossipore garden house. Surendra felt piqued at this. He was bearing
most of the expenses himself.

SURENDRA (to Kedār): \"How can I sit near all these holy people? A few
days ago some of them \[referring to Narendra\] put on the ochre robe of
the sannyāsi and went on a pilgrimage to Buddha-Gaya. They wanted to see
bigger sādhus there.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was trying to console Surendra. He said: \"You are
right. They are mere children. They don\'t know what is good.\"

SURENDRA (to Kedār): \"Doesn\'t our gurudeva know our inner feeling? He
does not care for money. It is our inner attitude that pleases him.\"

Sri Ramakrishna with a nod of his head approved Surendra\'s words.

The devotees had brought various food offerings for the Master and
placed them in front of him. Sri Ramakrishna put a grain on his tongue
and gave the plate to Surendra. He asked Surendra to distribute the
Prasad to the devotees. Surendra went downstairs with the offerings.

MASTER (to Kedār): \"You had better go downstairs and explain it all to
Surendra. See that they don\'t get into any hot arguments.\"

M. was fanning Sri Ramakrishna. The Master said to him, \"Won\'t you eat
anything?\" He sent M. downstairs.

**Girish and M.**

It was about dusk. Girish and M. were strolling near the small reservoir
in the garden. \'

GIRISH: \"I understand that you are writing something about the Master.
Is it true?\"

M: \"Who told you that?\"

GIRISH: \"I have heard about it. Will you give it to me?\"

1.  \"No, I won\'t part with it unless I feel it is right to do so. I am
    writing it for myself, not for others.\" GIRISH: \"What do you
    mean?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"You may get it when I die.\"

It was evening. A lamp was lighted in the Master\'s room. Amrita Basu, a
Brahmo devotee, came in. Sri Ramakrishna had expressed his eagerness to
see him. M. and a few other devotees were there. A garland of jasmine
lay in front of the Master on a plantain-leaf. There was perfect silence
in the room. A great yogi seemed to be silently communing with God.
Every now and then the Master lifted the garland a little, as if he
wanted to put it around his neck.

AMRITA (tenderly): \"Shall I put it around your neck?\"

Sri Ramakrishna accepted the garland. He had a long conversation with
Amrita. When the latter was about to

take his leave, the Master said, \"Come again.\"

AMRITA: \"Yes, sir. I like to come very much. But I live at a great
distance; so I cannot always come.\"

MASTER: \"Do come, and take the carriage hire from here.\"

The devotees were amazed at the Master\'s tender love for Amrita.

**Master\'s kindness to M. and his wife**

The next day M. came to the garden house accompanied by his wife and a
son. The boy was seven years old. It was at the Master\'s request that
he brought his wife, who was almost mad with grief owing to the death of
one of her sons.

That day the Master several times allowed M.\'s wife the privilege of
waiting on him. Her welfare seemed to occupy his attention a great deal.
In the evening the Holy Mother came to the Master\'s room to feed him.
M.\'s wife accompanied her with a lamp. The Master tenderly asked her
many questions about her household. He requested her to come again to
the garden house and spend a few days with the Holy Mother, not
forgetting to ask her to bring her baby daughter. When the Master had
finished his meal M.\'s wife removed the plates. He chatted with her a
few minutes.

About nine o\'clock in the evening Sri Ramakrishna was seated in his
room with the devotees. He had a garland of flowers around his neck. He
told M. that he had requested his wife to spend a few days at the garden
house with the Holy Mother. His kindness touched M.\'s heart.

M. was fanning him. The Master took the garland from his neck and said
something to himself. Then in a very benign mood he gave the garland to
M.

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 52**

AFTER THE PASSING AWAY

SRI RAMAKRISHNA passed away on Sunday, August 15, 1886, plunging his
devotees and disciples into a sea of grief. They were like men in a
shipwreck. But a strong bond of love held them together, and they found
assurance and courage in each other\'s company. They could not enjoy the
friendship of worldly people and would talk only of their Master.
\"Shall we not behold him again?\" -this was the one theme of their
thought and the one dream of their sleep. Alone, they wept for him;
walking in the streets of Calcutta, they were engrossed in the thought
of him. The Master had once said to M., \"It becomes difficult for me to
give up the body, when I realize that after my death you will wander
about weeping for me.\" Some of them thought : \"He is no longer in this
world. How surprising that we still enjoy living! We could give up our
bodies if we liked, but still we do not.\" Time and again Sri
Ramakrishna had told them that God reveals Himself to His devotees if
they yearn for Him and call on Him with whole-souled devotion. He had
assured them that God listens to the prayer of a sincere heart.

The young unmarried disciples of the Master, who belonged to his inner
circle, had attended on him day and night at the Cossipore garden house.
After his passing away most of them returned to their families against
their own wills. They had not yet formally renounced the world. For a
short while they kept their family names. But Sri Ramakrishna had made
them renounce the world mentally. He himself had initiated several of
them into the monastic life, giving them the ochre cloths of sannyāsis.

**Baranagore Monastery**

Two or three of the Master\'s attendants had no place to go. To them the
large-hearted Surendra said: \"Brothers, where will you go? Let us rent
a house. You will live there and make it our Master\'s shrine; and we
house-holders shall come there for consolation. How can we pass all our
days and nights with our wives and children in the world? I used to
spend a sum of money for the Master at Cossipore. I shall gladly give it
now for your expenses.\" Accordingly he rented a house for them at
Baranagore, in the suburbs of Calcutta, and this place became gradually
transformed into Math, or, monastery.

For the first few months Surendra contributed thirty rupees a month. As
the other members joined the monastery one by one, he doubled his
contribution, which he later increased to a hundred rupees. The monthly
rent for the house was eleven rupees. The cook received six rupees a
month. The rest was spent for food.

**First members**

The younger Gopal brought the Master\'s bed and other articles of daily
use from the garden house at Cossipore. The brahmin who had been cook at
Cossipore was engaged for the new monastery. The first permanent member
was the elder Gopal. Sarat spent the nights there. In the beginning
Sarat, Śaśi, Baburam, Niranjan, and Kāli used to visit the monastery
every now and then, according to their convenience. Tārak, who had gone
to Vrindāvan following the Master\'s death, returned to Calcutta after a
few months and soon became

1.  permanent member of the monastery. Rākhāl , Jogin, Lātu, and Kāli
    were living at Vrindāvan with the Holy Mother when the monastery was
    started. Kāli returned to Calcutta within a month, Rākhāl after a
    few months, and Jogin and Lātu after a year. The householder
    devotees frequently visited the monastic brothers and spent hours
    with them in meditation and study.

After a short time Narendra, Rākhāl , Niranjan, Sarat, Śaśi, Baburam,
Jogin, Tārak, Kāli, and Lātu renounced the world for good. Sarada
Prasanna and Subodh joined them some time later. Gangadhar, who was very
much attached to Narendra, visited the Math regularly. It was he who
taught the brothers the hymn sung at the evening service in the Śiva
temple at Benares. He had gone to Tibet to practise austerity; now,
having returned, he lived at the monastery. Hari and Tulasi, at first
only visitors at the monastery, soon embraced the monastic life and thus
completed the list of the Master\'s sannyāsi disciples.

*sādhanā*; otherwise we shall not be able

**Surendra\'s magnanimity**

Surendra was indeed a blessed soul. It was he who laid the foundation of
the great Order later associated with Sri Ramakrishna\'s name. His
devotion and sacrifice made it possible for those earnest souls to
renounce the world for the realization of God. Through him Sri
Ramakrishna made it possible for them to live in the world as
embodiments of his teaching, the renunciation of \"woman and gold\" and
the realization of God.

The brothers lived at the Math like orphan boys. Sometimes they would
not have the money to pay their house-rent; sometimes they would have no
food in the monastery. Surendra would come and settle all these things.
He was the big brother of the monks. Later on, when they thought of his
genuine love, the members of this first Math shed tears of gratitude.

**Ascetic zeal of the young sannyāsis**

The new monastery became known among the Master\'s devotees as the
Baranagore Math. Narendra, Rākhāl , and the other young disciples were
filled with intense renunciation. One day Rākhāl \'s father came to the
Math and asked Rākhāl to return home. \"Why do you take the trouble to
come here?\" Rākhāl said to him. \"I am very happy here. Pleased pray to
God that you may forget me and that I may forget you too.\" The young
disciples said to each other: \"We shall never return to the worldly
life. The Master enjoined upon us the renunciation of \'woman and
gold\'. How can we go back to our families?\"

Śaśi had taken charge of the daily worship in the Math. The Master\'s
relics had been brought from Balarām\'s house and Sri Ramakrishna was
worshipped daily in the worship hall. Narendra supervised the household.
He was the leader of the monastery. He would often tell his brother
disciples, \"The selfless actions enjoined in the Gitā are worship,
japa, meditation, and so on, and not worldly duties.\" The brothers at
the Math depended on

him for their spiritual inspiration. He said to them, \"We must practise
to realize God.\"

He and his brother disciples, filled with an ascetic spirit, devoted
themselves day and night to the practice of spiritual discipline. Their
one goal in life was the realization of God. They followed to their
hearts\' content the injunctions prescribed in the Vedas, Puranas, and
Tantras for an ascetic life. They spent their time in japa and
meditation and study of the scriptures. Whenever they would fail to
experience the Divine Presence, they would feel as if they were on the
rack. They would practise austerity, sometimes alone under trees,
sometimes in a cremation ground, sometimes on the bank of the Ganges.
Again, sometimes they would spend the entire day in the meditation room
of the monastery in japa and contemplation; sometimes they would gather
to sing and dance in a rapture of delight. All of them, and Narendra
particularly, were consumed with the desire to see God. Now and then
they would say to each other, \"Shall we not starve ourselves to death
to see God?\"

**Monday, February 21, 1887**

Narendra, Rākhāl , Niranjan, Sarat, Śaśi, Kāli, Baburam, Tārak, and
Sarada Prasanna were living in the monastery. All day the members had
been fasting in observance of the Sivaratri. Sarat, Kāli, Niranjan, and
Sarada were planning to go to Puri, the following Saturday, on a
pilgrimage to the sacred Jagannath. Jogin and Lātu were at Vrindāvan and
had not yet seen the new place.

Narendra had gone to Calcutta that morning to look after a lawsuit in
which his family had been involved since the death of his father. At
nine o\'clock in the morning M. arrived at the Math. Tārak saw him and
began to sing in praise of Śiva, Rākhāl joining him:

> *There Śiva dances, striking both His cheeks; and they resound,
> Ba-ba-bom!*
>
> *Dimi-dimi-dimi! sounds His drum; a garland of skulls from His neck is
> hanging!*
>
> *In His matted locks the Ganges hisses; fire shoots from His mighty
> trident!*
>
> *Round His waist a serpent glitters, and on His brow the moon Is
> shining!*

Rākhāl and Tārak danced as they sang. Narendra had recently composed the
song.

Śaśi finished the morning worship in the shrine. Sarat then sang about
Śiva to the accompaniment of the Tānpura.

Narendra had just arrived from Calcutta. He had not yet taken his bath.
Kāli asked him, \"What about the lawsuit?\" \"Why should you bother
about it?\" Narendra replied sharply.

**Renunciation of \"woman and gold\"**

Narendra was smoking and talking to M. and the others. He said:
\"Nothing can be achieved in spiritual life without the renunciation of
\'woman and gold\'. \'Woman\' is the doorway to hell. All people are
under the control of women. The cases of Śiva and Krishna are quite
different. Śiva turned His Consort into His servant. Sri Krishna, no
doubt, led a house-holder\'s life. But how unattached He was! How
quickly He renounced Vrindāvan and the gopis!\"

RĀKHĀL : \"And how He renounced Dwaraka, too, where He was king!\"

Narendra took his bath in the Ganges and returned to the monastery. He
carried his wet cloth and towel in his hand. Sarada prostrated himself
before Narendra. He too had been fasting on account of the Sivaratri. He
was going to the Ganges for his bath. Narendra entered the worship room
and prostrated himself before the picture of Sri Ramakrishna, who was
daily worshipped there as the Deity. For a few minutes he was absorbed
in meditation.

The devotees assembled in a room and began to converse. The talk turned
to Bhavanāth. Narendra said, \"People like him live like worms in the
world.\"

**Śiva festival at the Math**

It was afternoon. Arrangements were being made to worship Śiva in the
evening. Leaves of the bel-tree were gathered for the worship. Bel-wood
was chopped for the homa.

In the evening Śaśi, who was in charge of the worship at the monastery,
burnt incense before the pictures of the various gods and goddesses.

The worship of Śiva was to take place under the bel-tree in the
monastery compound. The Deity was to be worshipped four times, during
the four watches of the night. The brothers assembled under the
bel-tree. Bhupati and M. were present also. One of the young members of
the Math was in charge of the worship. Kāli was reading from the Gitā.
Now and then he argued with Narendra.

KĀLI: \"I alone am everything. I create, preserve, and destroy.\"

NARENDRA: \"How is it possible for me to create? Another power creates
through me. Our various actions-even our thoughts-are caused by that
power.\"

M. (to himself): \"The Master used to say: \'As long as a man feels that
it is he who meditates, he is under the jurisdiction of the *Ādyāśakti*.
Śakti must be acknowledged.\'\"

Kāli reflected in silence a few moments and then said: \"The actions you
are talking about are illusory. There is not even any such thing as
thought. The very idea of these things makes me laugh.\"

NARENDRA: \"The \'I\' that is implied in \'I am He\' is not this ego. It
is that which remains after one eliminates mind, body, and so on.\"

After completing the recital of the Gitā, Kāli chanted, \"Śāntih!
Śāntih! Śāntih!\"

Narendra and the other devotees stood up and circled round and round the
tree, singing and dancing. Now and then they chanted in chorus: \"Śiva
Guru! Śiva Guru!\"

*Ārati.*

It was midnight, the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight of the moon.
Pitch darkness filled all the quarters. Men, birds, and animals were all
hushed into silence. The young sannyāsis were clad in *Gerruā* robes.
The

words \"Śiva Guru\", chanted in their full-throated voices, rose into
the infinite sky like the rumblings of rain-clouds and disappeared in
the Indivisible Satchidananda.

The worship was over. The sun, about to rise, was painting the eastern
horizon crimson. In this sacred twilight, the conjunction of night and
day, the holy Brahmamuhurta, the young worshippers finished their baths
in the Ganges.

It was morning. The devotees went to the shrine room, prostrated
themselves before the Deity, and gradually assembled in the big hall.
Narendra was clad in a new ochre cloth. The bright orange colour of his
apparel blended with the celestial lustre of his face and body, every
pore of which radiated a divine light. His countenance was filled with
fiery brilliance and yet touched with the tenderness of love. He
appeared to all as a bubble that had risen up in the Ocean of Absolute
Existence and Bliss and assumed a human body to help in the propagation
of his Master\'s message. All eyes were fixed on him. Narendra was then
just twenty-four years old, the very age at which the great Chaitanya
had renounced the world.

Balarām had sent fruit and sweets to the monastery for the devotees\'
breakfast. Rākhāl , Narendra, and a few others partook of the
refreshments. After eating one or two morsels some of them cried out,
\"Blessed indeed is Balarām!\" All laughed.

Narendra now began to joke like a child. He was imitating Sri
Ramakrishna. He put a sweet into his mouth and stood still, as if in
samādhi. His eyes remained unwinking. A devotee stepped forward and
pretended to hold him up by the hand lest he should drop to the ground.
Narendra closed his eyes. A few minutes later, with the sweetmeat still
in his mouth, he opened his eyes and drawled out,
\"I\--am\--all\--right.\" All laughed loudly.

Refreshments were now given to everyone. M. looked on at this wonderful
mart of happiness.

The devotees shouted joyfully, \"Jai Guru Mahārāj\" !

**Monday, March 25, 1887**

M. arrived at the Baranagore Math to visit his brother disciples.
Devendra accompanied him. M. had been coming to the monastery very
frequently and now and then had spent a day or two. The previous week he
had spent three days at the Math. He was very eager to observe the
spirit of intense renunciation of these young men.

It was evening. M. intended to spend the night in the monastery. Śaśi
lighted the lamp in the worship room and chanted the name of God. Next
he burnt incense before all the pictures of gods and goddesses in the
various rooms. The evening service began. Śaśi conducted the worship,
The members of the Math, with M. and

Devendra, stood with folded hands and sang the hymn of the

**Narendra\'s reminiscences of the Master**

When the worship was over, Narendra and M. became engaged in
conversation. Narendra was recalling his various meetings with Sri
Ramakrishna.

NARENDRA: \"One day, during one of my early visits, the Master in an
ecstatic mood said to me, \'You have come!\' \'How amazing!\' I said to
myself. \'It is as if he had known me a long time.\' Then he said to me,
\'Do you ever see light?\' I replied: \'Yes, sir. Before I fall asleep I
feel something like a light revolving near my forehead.\' \"

M: \"Do you see it even now?\"

NARENDRA :\"I used to see it frequently. In Jadu Mallick\'s garden house
the Master one day touched me and muttered something to himself. I
became unconscious. The effect of the touch lingered with me a month,
like

an intoxication.

\"When he heard that a proposal had been made about my marriage, he
wept, holding the feet of the image of Kāli. With tears in his eyes he
prayed to the Divine Mother: \'O Mother, please upset the whole thing!
Don\'t let Narendra be drowned.\'

\"After my father\'s death my mother and my brothers were starving. When
the Master met Annada Guha one day, he said to him: \'Narendra\'s father
has died. His family is in a state of great privation. It would be good
if his friends helped him now with money.\'

\"After Annada had left I scolded him. I said, \'Why did you say all
those things to him?\' Thus rebuked, he wept and said, \'Alas! for your
sake I could beg from door to door.\'

\"He tamed us by his love. Don\'t you think so?\"

M: \"There is not the slightest doubt about it. His love was utterly
unselfish.\"

NARENDRA: \"One day when I was alone with him he said something to me.
Nobody else was present. Please don\'t repeat it to anyone here,\"

M: \"No, I shall not. What did he say?\"

NARENDRA: \"He said: \'It is not possible for me to exercise occult
powers; but I shall do so through you. What do you say?\' \'No,\' I
replied, \'you can\'t do that.\'

\"I used to laugh at his words. You must have heard all these things
from him. I told him that his visions of God were all hallucinations of
his mind.

\"He said to me: \'I used to climb to the roof of the kuthi and cry: \"O
devotees, where are you all? Come to me, O devotees! I am about to die.
I shall certainly die if I do not see you.\" And the Divine Mother told
me, \"The devotees will come.\" You see, everything is turning out to be
true.\'

\"What else could I say? I kept quiet.

\"One day he closed the door of his room and said to Devendra Babu and
Girish Babu, referring to me, \'He will not keep his body if he is told
who he is.\'\"

1.  \"Yes, we have heard that. Many a time he repeated the same thing to
    us, too. Once you came to know about your true Self in nirvikalpa
    samādhi at the Cossipore garden house. Isn\'t that true?\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes. In that experience I felt that I had no body. I could
see only my face. The Master was in the upstairs room. I had that
experience downstairs. I was weeping. I said, \'What has happened to
me?\' The elder Gopal went to the Master\'s room and said, \'Narendra is
crying.\'

\"When I saw the Master he said to me: \'Now you have known. But I am
going to keep the key with me.\'

\"I said to him, \'What is it that happened to me?\'

\"Turning to the devotees, he said: \'He will not keep his body if he
knows who he is. But I have put a veil over his eyes.\'

\"One day he said to me, \'You can see Krishna in your heart if you
want.\' I replied, \'I don\'t believe in Krishna or any such nonsense!\'
(Both M. and Narendra laugh.)

**Narendra\'s foreknowledge of things**

\"I have noticed a peculiar thing. Some men, objects, or places make me
feel as if I had seen them before, in a

previous birth. They appear familiar to me. One day I went to Sarat\'s
house in Calcutta, on Amherst Street. Immediately I said to Sarat:
\'This house seems familiar to me. It seems to me that I have known the
rooms, the passages, and the rest of the house for many, many days.

\"I used to follow my own whims in everything I did. The Master never
interfered. You know that I became a member of the Sadharan Brahmo
Samaj.\"

M: \"Yes, I know that.\"

NARENDRA: \"The Master knew that women attended the meetings of the
Brahmo Samaj. A man cannot meditate with women sitting in front of him;
therefore he criticized the meditation of the Brahmo Samaj. But he
didn\'t object to my going there. But one day he said to me, \'Don\'t
tell Rākhāl about your being a member of the Brahmo Samaj, or he too
will feel like becoming one.\'\"

M: \"You have greater strength of mind. That is why the Master didn\'t
prevent your going to the Samaj.\"

NARENDRA: \"I have attained my present state of mind as a result of much
suffering and pain. You have not passed through any such suffering. I
now realize that without trials and tribulations one cannot resign
oneself to God and depend on Him absolutely.

**Narendra\'s ego**

\"Well, X- is so modest and humble! He is totally self-effacing. Can you
tell me how I can develop humility?\"

1.  \"Speaking about your ego, the Master said, \'Whose ego is it?\'\"
    NARENDRA: \"What did he mean?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"A friend one day said to Rādhika: \'You are egotistic. That is why
    you insulted Krishna.\' Whereupon another friend said to the first:
    \'Yes, Rādhika is egotistic, no doubt. But whose ego is it?\' What
    she meant was that Radha was egotistic because she regarded Krishna
    as her Lord. It was Krishna Himself who kept that ego in Radha.

\"What the Master meant was that it is God alone who has kept this ego
in you, so that He may accomplish many things through you.

NARENDRA: \"But my ego loudly proclaims to all that I have no
suffering.\"

M. (smiling): \"You may loudly proclaim it, if that be your sweet
will.\"

The conversation turned to other devotees.

NARENDRA: \"The Master said about Vijay Goswami, \'He is knocking at the
door.\' \"

M: \"That is to say, he has not yet entered the room. At Syampukur Vijay
said to the Master, \'I saw you at Dāccā in this tangible form, in this
very body.\' You were there too.\"

NARENDRA: \"Devendra Babu and Ram Babu want to renounce the World. They
are trying hard. Ram Babu told me privately that he would give up the
world after two years.\"

M: \"After two years? After making provision for his children?\"

NARENDRA: \"Besides, he will rent his present house and buy a small
house. Other relatives will arrange his daughter\'s marriage.\"

**About Nityagopal**

1.  \"Gopal is in an exalted state of mind, isn\'t he?\" NARENDRA:
    \"What do you mean?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"So much emotion, so much weeping and such exaltation in the name
    of God!\"

NARENDRA: \"Does mere emotion make a man spiritually great? Youngsters
like Kāli, Sarat, Śaśi, and Sarada are more spiritual than Gopal. How
great their renunciation is! Gopal does not accept the Master, does
he?\"

1.  \"That is true. The Master remarked that Gopal did not belong to the
    circle of his devotees. But I saw him show great reverence for Sri
    Ramakrishna.\"

NARENDRA: \"What did you see?\"

1.  \"At that time I was just becoming acquainted with Sri Ramakrishna.
    One day after the meeting of the devotees in his room had broken up,
    I came out and saw Gopal on the foot-path, kneeling with folded
    hands before the Master. The moon was shining brightly overhead. It
    was the red path sprinkled with brick-dust, just outside the long
    verandah north of the Master\'s room. Nobody else was there. It
    appeared to me that Gopal had taken shelter at Sri Ramakrishna\'s
    feet and the Master was encouraging him.\"

NARENDRA: \"I didn\'t see it.\"

1.  \"Further, the Master used to say, \'Gopal is in the state of a
    paramahamsa.\' But I also distinctly remember his forbidding Gopal
    to be intimate with woman devotees. Many a time he warned him about
    it.\"

NARENDRA: \"Speaking to me about Gopal, the Master asked why, if Gopal
was a real Paramahamsa, he should hanker after money. \'He doesn\'t
belong to this place\', the Master said. \'Those who are my own will
always come here.\' He used to be angry with T - because he was Gopal\'s
constant companion and didn\'t come to the Master more often. \'Gopal
has spiritual realizations, no doubt,\' the Master said to me, \'but he
has attained them all of a sudden, without the necessary preparations.
He is not one of my own. If he is, why haven\'t I wept for him?\'

\"Some are proclaiming Gopal as the reincarnation of Nityananda. But
times without number the Master said to me: \'In me alone are embodied
Advaita, Chaitanya, and Nityananda. I am all these three.\'\"

**Friday, April 8, 1887**

About eight o\'clock in the morning two devotees, one a householder and
the other a monk, were conversing in

1.  room in the Barangore monastery, when M. came in. The devotees were
    of the same age-twenty-four or twenty-five years old. M. intended to
    spend three days at the monastery. He went to the shrine and saluted
    the Deity. After visiting Narendra, Rākhāl , and the other brothers,
    he at last came into the room where the

two devotees were engaged in conversation. The householder devotee
wanted to renounce the world, The monk was trying to persuade him not to
do so.

MONK: \"Why don\'t you finish the few duties you have in the world? Very
soon they will be left behind,

\"A man was told that he would go to hell. He asked a friend, \'What is
hell like?\' Thereupon the friend began to draw a picture of hell on the
ground with a piece of chalk. No sooner was the picture drawn than the
man rolled over it and said, \'Now I have gone through hell!\'\"

HOUSEHOLDER: \"I don\'t relish worldly life, Ah, how happy you are
here!\"

MONK: \"Why don\'t you renounce the world, if you want to? Why do you
talk about it so much? But I repeat, why don\'t you enjoy the fun once
for all?\"

Śaśi finished the regular worship in the worship hall. About eleven the
brothers of the Math returned from the

Ganges after taking their baths. They put on clean cloths, went to the
shrine, prostrated themselves before the Deity, and meditated there a
little while.

After the food was offered to the Deity they had their meal. M. ate with
them.

It was evening. Incense was burnt before the pictures of gods and
goddesses and the evening service was performed. Rākhāl , Śaśi, the
elder Gopal, and Harish were seated in the big hall. M. also was there.

**Rākhāl \'s reminiscences of the Master**

Rākhāl warned one of the brothers to be careful about the food to he
offered to the Master in the shrine.

RĀKHĀL (to Śaśi and the others): \"One day I ate part of his \[meaning
the Master\'s\] refreshments before he

took them. At this he said: \'I cannot look at you. How could you do
such a thing?\' I burst into tears.\"

THE ELDER GOPAL: \"One day at Cossipore I breathed hard on his food. At
this he said, \'Take that food away.\' \"

M. and Narendra were pacing the verandah and recalling old times.

NARENDRA: \"I did not believe in anything.\"

M:\" You mean the forms of God?\"

NARENDRA: \"At first I did not accept most of what the Master said. One
day he asked me, \'Then why do you come here?\' I replied, \'I come here
to see you, not to listen to you.\' \"

1.  \"What did he say to that?\" NARENDRA: \"He was very much pleased.\"

**Saturday, April 9, 1887**

**The Master and Narendra**

The member of the Math were resting a little after their meal. Narendra
and M. sat under a tree in the garden to the west of the monastery. It
was a solitary place and no one else was present. Narendra was
recounting to M. his various experiences with Sri Ramakrishna, Narendra
was about twenty-four years old, and M. thirty-two.

M: \"You must remember vividly your first visit to him.\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes. It was at the temple garden at Dakshineswar, in his own
room. That day I sang two songs.\"

Narendra sang them for M.:

> *Let us go back once more, O mind, to our own abode!*
>
> *Here in this foreign land of earth*
>
> *Why should we wander aimlessly in stranger\'s guise?*
>
> *These living beings round about, and the five elements;*
>
> *Are strangers to you, all of them; none is your own.*
>
> *Why do you thus forget yourself,*
>
> *In love with strangers, O my mind?*
>
> *Why do you thus forget your own?*
>
> *Ascend the path of Truth, O mind! Unflaggingly climb,*
>
> *With Love as the lamp to light your way.*
>
> *As your provision for the journey, bring with you*
>
> *The virtues, carefully concealed; for, like two highwaymen,*
>
> *Greed and delusion wait to rob you of your wealth.*
>
> *And keep beside you constantly,*
>
> *As guards to shelter you from harm,*
>
> *Calmness of mind and self-control.*
>
> *Companionship with holy men will be for you*
>
> *A welcome rest-house by the road;*
>
> *There rest your weary limbs awhile, asking your way,*
>
> *If ever you should be in doubt, of him who watches there.*
>
> *If anything along the path should frighten you,*
>
> *Then loudly shout the name of the Lord;*
>
> *For He is Ruler of that road,*
>
> *And even Death must bow to Him.*
>
> *O Lord, must all my days pass by so utterly in vain?*
>
> *Down the path of hope I gaze with longing, day and night.*
>
> *Thou art the Lord of all the worlds, and I but a beggar here;*
>
> *How can I ask of Thee to come and dwell within my heart?*
>
> *My poor heart\'s humble cottage door is standing open wide;*
>
> *Be gracious, Lord, and enter there but once, and quench its thirst!*

M: \"What did he say after listening to your songs?\"

NARENDRA: \"He went into samādhi. He said to Ram Babu: \'Who is this
boy? How well he sings!\' He asked me to come again.\"

M: \"Where did you see him next?\"

NARENDRA: \"At Rājmohan\'s house. The third visit was at Dakshineswar
again. During that visit he went into samādhi and began to praise me as
if I were God. He said to me, \'O Narayana, you have assumed this body
for my sake.\' But please don\'t tell this to anybody else.\"

M: \"What else did he say?\"

NARENDRA: \"He said: \'You have assumed this body for my sake. I asked
the Divine Mother, \"Mother, unless I enjoy the company of some genuine
devotees completely free from \'woman and gold\', how shall I live on
earth?\" \'

Then he said to me, \'You came to me at night woke me up, and said,
\"Here I am!\"\' But I did not know anything of this. I was sound asleep
in our Calcutta house.\"

1.  \"In other words, you may be both present and absent at the same
    time. It is like God, who is both formless and endowed with form.\"

NARENDRA: \"But you must not tell this to anyone else. At Cossipore he
transmitted his power to me.\"

1.  \"Didn\'t it happen when you used to meditate before a lighted fire
    under a tree at the Cossipore garden house?\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes. One day, while meditating, I asked Kāli to hold my
hand. Kāli said to me, \'When I touched your body I felt something like
an electric shock coming to my body.\'

\"But you must not tell this to anybody here. Give me your promise.\"

M: \"There is a special purpose in his transmission of power to you. He
will accomplish much work through you.

> One day the Master, wrote on a piece of paper, \'Naren will teach
> people.\'\"
>
> NARENDRA: \"But I said to him, \'I won\'t do any such thing.\'
> Thereupon he said, \'Your very bones will do it.\' He has given me
> charge of Sarat. Sarat is now yearning for God; the Kundalini is
> awakened in him.\"

1.  \"He must be careful that dead leaves do not accumulate there.
    > Perhaps you remember what the Master used to say: \'In a lake the
    > fish make holes so that they may rest there. But if dead leaves
    > accumulate in the holes, the fish do not go there.\' \"

> NARENDRA: \"The Master used to call me Narayana.\"
>
> M: \"Yes, I know he did.\"
>
> NARENDRA: \"When he was ill he would not allow me to pour water to
> wash his hands. At Cossipore he said:
>
> \'Now the key is in my hands. He will give up his body when he knows
> who he is.\'\"
>
> M; \"Didn\'t he say it when you were in nirvikalpa samādhi?\"
>
> NARENDRA: \"Yes. At the time it seemed to me I had no body. I felt
> only my face.
>
> \"I was studying law at home to prepare for the examinations. Suddenly
> I said to myself, \'What am I doing?\' \"
>
> M: \"Didn\'t it happen when the Master was at Cossipore?\"
>
> NARENDRA: \"Yes. Like an insane person I ran out of our house. He
> asked me, \'What do you want?\' I replied, \'I
>
> want to remain immersed in samādhi.\' He said: \'What a small mind you
> have! Go beyond samādhi! Samādhi is a very trifling thing.\' \"

1.  \"Yes, he used to say that vijnāna is the stage after jnāna. It is
    > like going up and down the stairs after reaching the roof.\"

> NARENDRA: \"Kāli has a craving for knowledge. I scold him for that. Is
> knowledge so easy to get? Let his bhakti first mature. The Master told
> Tārak at Dakshineswar that emotion and bhakti are by no means the last
> word.\"
>
> M: \"What other things did he say about you?\"
>
> NARENDRA: \"Once I said to him, The forms of God and things like that,
> which you see in your visions, are all figments of your imagination.\'
> He had so much faith in my words that he went to the Divine Mother in
> the temple and told Her what I had said to him. He asked Her, \'Are
> these hallucinations, then?\' Afterwards he said to me, \'Mother told
> me that all these are real.\'
>
> \"Perhaps you remember that he said to me, \'When you sing, He who
> dwells here (touching his heart), like a snake, hisses as it were, and
> then, spreading His hood, quietly holds Himself steady and listens to
> your music.\'
>
> \"He has no doubt said many things about me; but what have I
> realized?\"

1.  \"Now you have put on the garb of Śiva; you cannot touch money. Do
    you remember the Master\'s story?\" NARENDRA: \"Please tell it to
    me.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"A Bahurupi disguised himself as Śiva and visited a house. The
    master of the house wanted to give him a rupee, but he did not
    accept it. Then the mendicant went home, removed his disguise, came
    back to the gentleman, and asked for the rupee. \'Why didn\'t you
    accept it before?\' he was asked. He said: \'I was impersonating
    Śiva, a sannyāsi. I couldn\'t touch money that time.\' \"

When Narendra heard the story he laughed a long while.

1.  \"You have now put on the garb of a physician, as it were. You have
    become the guardian of these young men. Yours is the entire
    responsibility. You have to bring up the brothers of the
    monastery.\"

NARENDRA: \"Whatever spiritual disciplines we are practising here are in
obedience to the Master\'s command. But it is strange that Ram Babu
criticizes us for our spiritual practices. He says: \'We have seen him.
What need have we of any such practice?\' \"

M: \"Let people act according to their faith.\"

NARENDRA: \"But the Master asked us to practise *sādhanā*.\"

**Master\'s love for Narendra**

Narendra was again telling M. about the Master\'s love for him.

NARENDRA: \"How many times he prayed to the Divine Mother for my sake!
After my father\'s death, when I had no food at home and my mother and
sisters and brothers were starving too, the Master prayed to the Divine
Mother to give me money.\"

M: \"Yes, I know that. You once told me.\"

NARENDRA: \"But I didn\'t get any money. The Master told me what the
Divine Mother had said to him: \'He will get simple food and clothing.
He will eat rice and *dāl.\'*

\"He loved me so much! But whenever an impure idea crept into my mind he
at once knew about it. While going around with Annada, sometime I found
myself in the company of evil people. On those occasions the Master
could not eat any food from my hands. He could raise his hand only a
little, and could not bring it to his mouth. On one such occasion, while
he was ill, he brought his hand very close to his mouth, but it did not
go in. He said to me, \'You are not yet ready.\'

\"Now and then I feel great scepticism. At Baburam\'s house it seemed to
me that nothing existed-as if there were no such thing as God.\"

M: \"The Master used to say that he too had passed through that mood.\"

Both M. and Narendra remained silent. Then M. said: \"You are all indeed
blessed! You think of the Master day and night.\"

NARENDRA: \"But how little it is! We don\'t yet feel like giving up the
body because we haven\'t realized God.\"

It was night. Niranjan had just returned from Puri The members of the
Math, and M., greeted him with great joy. Niranjan was telling them his
experiences. He was then about twenty-five years old.

The evening worship was over. Some of the brothers were meditating. But
many of them assembled in the big hall around Niranjan. They were
talking. After nine o\'clock Śaśi offered food to the Deity.

The members of the Math finished their supper, which consisted of
home-made bread, a little vegetable, and a little hard molasses.

**Saturday, May 7, 1887**

It was the full-moon day of the month of Vaiśākh. Narendra and M. were
seated on a couch in M.\'s study in Calcutta. They were talking. Just
before Narendra\'s arrival, M. had been studying The Merchant of Venice,
Comus, and Blackie\'s Self-culture, which he taught at school.

Narendra and the other brothers of the monastery were full of yearning
for God-realization. A fire of intense renunciation raged in their
hearts.

NARENDRA: \"I don\'t care for anything. You see, I am now talking with
you, but I feel like getting up this minute and running away.\"

Narendra sat in silence a few minutes. Then he said, \"I shall fast to
death for the realization of God.\"

1.  \"That is good. One can do anything for God.\" NARENDRA: \"But
    suppose I cannot control my hunger.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Then eat something and begin over again.\" Narendra remained
    silent a few minutes.

NARENDRA: \"It seems there is no God. I pray so much, but there is no
reply-none whatsoever.

\"How many visions I have seen! How many *mantrās* shining in letters of
gold! How many visions of the Goddess Kāli! How many other divine forms!
But still I have no peace. \"Will you kindly give me six pice?\"

Narendra asked for the money to pay his carriage hire to the Barangore
Math. Just then Satkari arrived in a carriage. Of the same age as
Narendra, he dearly loved the members of the monastery. He lived near
the Math and worked in Calcutta. The carriage was his own. Narendra
returned the money to M. and said that he would go with Satkari in his
carriage. He asked M. to give them some refreshments.

M. accompanied the two friends to the Barangore Math. He wanted to see
how the brothers spent their time and practised *sādhana.* He wanted to
see how Sri Ramakrishna, the Master, was reflected in the hearts of the

disciples. Niranjan was not at the Math. He had gone home to visit his
mother, the only relative he had in the world. Baburam, Sarat, and Kāli
had gone to Puri. They intended to spend a few days there.

**Prasanna\'s austere *sādhanā***

Narendra was in charge of the members of the monastery. Prasanna had
been practising austere *sādhanā* for the past few days. Once Narendra
had told him of his desire to fast to death for the realization of God.
During Narendra\'s absence in Calcutta, Prasanna had left the monastery
for an unknown destination. When Narendra heard about it, he said to the
brothers, \"Why did Raja allow him to go?\" But Rākhāl had not been in
the monastery at the time, having gone to the Dakshineswar temple for a
stroll.

NARENDRA: \"Just let Raja come back to the monastery! I shall scold him.
Why did he allow Prasanna to go away? (To Harish) I am sure you were
lecturing him then, standing with your feet apart. Couldn\'t you prevent
his going away?\"

Harish replied in a very low voice, \"Brother Tārak asked him not to go,
but still he went away.\"

NARENDRA (to M.): \"You see what a lot of trouble I am in! Here, too, I
am involved in a world of māyā. Who knows where this boy has gone?\"

Rākhāl returned from Dakshineswar. Bhavanāth had accompanied him.

Narendra told Rākhāl about Prasanna\'s going away from the monastery.
Prasanna had left a letter for Narendra. This was the substance of the
letter: \"I am going to Vrindāvan on foot. It is very risky for me to
live here. Here my mind is undergoing a change. Formerly I used to dream
about my parents and other relatives. Then I dreamt of woman, the
embodiment of māyā. I have suffered twice; I had to go back to my
relatives at home. Therefore I am going far away from them. The Master
once told me, \'Your people at home are apt to do anything; never trust
them.\' \"

Rākhāl said: \"These are the reasons for his going away. Once he
remarked: \'Narendra often goes home to look after his mother, brothers,
and sisters. And he supervises the family\'s lawsuit. I am afraid that I
too may feel like going home, following his example.\' \"

Narendra remained silent.

Rākhāl was talking to them about making pilgrimages. He said: \"We have
achieved nothing by staying here. The Master always exhorted us to
realize God. Have we succeeded?\"

Rākhāl lay down. The other devotees were either lying down or sitting.

RĀKHĀL : \"Let us go to the Narmada.\"

NARENDRA: \"What will you achieve by wandering about? Can one ever
attain jnāna, that you are talking about it so much?\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Then why have you renounced the world?\"

NARENDRA: \"Must we live with Shyam because we have not seen Ram? Must
we go on begetting children because we have not realized God? What are
you talking about?\"

Narendra went out, returning after a few minutes. Rākhāl was still lying
down.

A member of the monastery who was also lying down said teasingly,
feigning great suffering on account of his separation from God: \"Ah!
Please get me a knife. I have no more use for this life. I can\'t stand
this pain any more!\"

NARENDRA (feigning seriousness): \"It is there. Stretch out your hand
and take it.\"

Everybody laughed.

The conversation again turned to Prasanna.

NARENDRA: \"Even here we are involved in māyā. Why have we become
sannyāsis, I wonder?\"

RĀKHĀL : \"I have read in a book that sannyāsis should not live
together. The author has described a city of sannyāsis.\"

ŚAŚI: \"I don\'t care about sannyās or any such thing. There is no place
where I cannot live.\" They were talking of Bhavanāth, whose wife had
been seriously ill.

Narendra said to Rākhāl : \"I understand that his wife has been snatched
from the jaws of death. Is that why he went to Dakshineswar to enjoy the
fresh air?\"

Ram Babu intended to build a temple in the garden at Kankurgachi, where
some of Sri Ramakrishna\'s ashes were buried.

NARENDRA (to Rākhāl ): \"Ram Babu has made M. one of the trustees of the
garden.\"

M. (to Rākhāl ): \"But I don\'t know anything about it.\"

It was dusk. Śaśi burnt incense before the picture of Sri Ramakrishna in
the worship room and then before the pictures of gods and goddesses in
the other rooms.

The evening worship began. The members of the Math and the other
devotees stood with folded hands near the door of the shrine and
witnessed the *Ārati*. Then they all sang in chorus the following hymn
to Śiva, to the

> accompaniment of bell and gong:
>
> *Jaya Śiva Omkara, Bhaja Śiva Omkara,*
>
> *Brahma Vishnu Sadasiva,*
>
> *Hara Hara Hara Mahadeva!*
>
> Narendra had introduced this song for the evening worship. It is sung
> in the temple of Śiva in Benares.
>
> It was eleven o\'clock at night when their supper was over. The
> brothers prepared a bed for M., and all went to sleep.
>
> It was midnight. M. was wide awake. He said to himself: \"Everything
> is as it was before. The same Ayodhya only Rāmā is not there.\" M.
> silently left his bed. It was the full-moon night of Vaiśākh, the
> thrice-blessed day of the Buddhists, associated with Buddha\'s birth,
> realization, and passing away. M. was walking alone on the bank of the
> Ganges, contemplating the Master.
>
> It was Sunday. M. had arrived the day before and was planning to stay
> till Wednesday. The householder devotees generally visited the
> monastery on Sundays.
>
> The Yoga-vāsishta was being studied and explained. M. had heard a
> little about the teachings of this book from Sri Ramakrishna. It
> taught the absolute identity of Brahman and the soul, and the
> unreality of the world. The Master had forbidden him and the other
> householder devotees to practise spiritual discipline following the
> method of the Advaita Vedānta, since the attitude of the oneness of
> the soul and God is harmful for one still identified with the body.
> For such a devotee, the Master used to say, it was better to look on
> God as the Lord and oneself as His servant.
>
> The conversation turned to the Yoga-vāsishta.
>
> M: \"Well, how is Brahmajnana described in the Yoga-vāsishta?\"
>
> RĀKHĀL : \"Hunger, thirst, pain, pleasure, and so on, are all māyā.
> The annihilation of the mind is the only means to the realization of
> Brahman.\"

1.  \"What remains after the annihilation of the mind is Brahman. Is
    that not true?\" RĀKHĀL : \"Yes.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Sri Ramakrishna used to say that Nangta taught him that way. Have
    you found in the book that Vasishtha asked Rāma to lead a
    householder\'s life?\"

> RĀKHĀL : \"I haven\'t yet found anything like that in the book. Rāma
> is not even admitted by the author to be an Incarnation of God.\"
>
> Presently Narendra, Tārak, and another devotee returned from the bank
> of the Ganges. They had intended to go to Konnagar, on the other side
> of the river, but had been unable to find a ferry-boat. They sat down.
> The conversation about the Yoga-vāsishta went on.
>
> NARENDRA (to M.): \"There are many nice stories in the book. Do you
> know the incident of Lila?\"
>
> M: \"Yes, I have read the book here and there. Lila had attained
> Brahmajnana.\"
>
> NARENDRA: \"Yes. Do you remember the story of Indra and Ahalyā, and
> the story of how King Viduratha became a chandala?\"
>
> M: \"Yes, I remember.\"

NARENDRA: \"What a wonderful description of the forest!\"

Narendra and the other devotees were going to the Ganges to bathe. M.
accompanied them. The sun was very hot; so M. took his umbrella. Sarat,
a devotee from Barangore, was going with them to take his bath. He often
visited the monastery.

M. (to Sarat): \"It is very hot.\"

NARENDRA: \"Is that your excuse for taking the umbrella?\"

M. laughed.

The members of the monastery were clad in *Gerruā*.

M. (to Narendra): \"It is really very hot. One is liable to get a
sunstroke.\"

NARENDRA: \"I see that your body is the obstacle in your path of
renunciation. Isn\'t that so? I mean you, Devendra Babu-\"

M. laughed and said to himself, \"Is it merely the body?\"

After bathing, the devotees returned to the monastery. They washed their
feet and entered the worship room.

Saluting the Deity, they offered flowers.

Narendra was a little late in coming to the worship room. He found that
there was no flower on the tray. There were only a few bel-leaves. He
sprinkled the leaves with sandal-paste and offered them to Sri
Ramakrishna. He rang the bell, saluted the Deity again, and joined the
other brothers in the big hall, which was known as the room of the
\"Dānās\".

The members of the Math called themselves the \"Dānās\" and the
\"Daityās\", which mean the \"ghosts\" and the \"demons\", the
companions of Śiva. They took these names because of their utter
indifference to worldly pleasures and relationships.

The southernmost room of the second floor was used for meditation,
contemplation, and study, and was known as Kāli Tapasvi\'s room, since
Kāli used to shut himself in there most of the day. North of this room
was the worship room, and north of that, again, was the room where the
offerings for the worship were prepared. From this room the devotees
used to watch the evening worship. North of the \"offering room\" was
the room of the \"Dānās\", a very long hall where the members of the
Math used to assemble. Here the householder devotees and visitors were
received. North of this hall was a small room where the devotees took
their meals. East of the worship room and of Kāli Tapasvi\'s room ran a
long verandah, at the south-west corner of which was the library of a
society of Barangore. Between Kāli Tapasvi\'s room and this library was
a staircase; and north of the dining room was another staircase, leading
to the roof.

Narendra and the other members of the Math often spent their evenings on
this roof. There they devoted a great deal of time to discussion of the
teachings of Sri Ramakrishna, Sankaracharya, Ramanuja, and Jesus Christ,
and of Hindu philosophy, European philosophy, the Vedas, the Puranas,
and the Tantras.

Narendra, who had a beautiful voice, used to sing in the room of the
\"Dānās\" and teach music to Sarat and a few others. Kāli used to take
lessons on the instruments. Many, many happy hours they spent together
in that hall, dancing and singing.

Narendra was sitting with the devotees in the room of the \"Dānās\". The
conversation turned to religious preaching.

> **Vidyāsāgar\'s reluctance about preaching**
>
> M. (to Narendra): \"Vidyāsāgar says that he does not speak about God
> to anyone for fear of being caned.\"
>
> NARENDRA: \"For fear of being caned? What does he mean?\"

1.  \"This is what Vidyāsāgar says: \'Suppose that after death we all go
    > to God. The emissaries of Death will have sent Keshab Sen there
    > too. Keshab Sen, no doubt, committed sins while he lived on earth.
    > When that is proved, perhaps God will say, \"Give him twenty-five
    > stripes.\" Then suppose I am taken to God. I used to go to Keshab
    > Sen\'s Brahmo Samaj in my earthly life. I too have committed many
    > sins; so I too am ordered to be caned. Then suppose I say to God
    > that I acted in that sinful way because I listened to Keshab\'s
    > preaching. Thereupon God will ask His emissaries to bring Keshab
    > back. When he is brought, the Almighty Lord will say to him: \"Did
    > you really preach that way? You yourself knew nothing about
    > spiritual matters and yet you had the hardihood to teach others
    > about God! Emissaries! Give him twenty-five stripes more.\" \' \"

> Everybody laughed.

1.  \"Therefore Vidyāsāgar says: \'I cannot take care of my own self,
    should I be foolish enough to get an additional caning for
    misleading others? I myself do not understand God. How shall I
    lecture to others about Him?\' \"

> NARENDRA: \"How has he-who could not understand God-understood other
> things?\"
>
> M: \"What other things?\"
>
> NARENDRA: \"He says that he has not understood God. But how, then, can
> he understand charity and doing good to others? How can he understand
> about the school? How can he understand about educating boys by
> establishing schools? How can he understand that it is right to enter
> the world, marry, and beget children?
>
> \"He who rightly understands one thing understands everything else.\"
>
> M. (to himself): \"Yes, Sri Ramakrishna, too, said that he who knows
> God knows everything else. Further, he said to Vidyāsāgar that leading
> a worldly life, establishing schools, and so on are the outcome of
> rajas. The Master also said that Vidyāsāgar\'s philanthropy was due to
> the influence of sattva on rajas. Such rajas is not harmful.\"
>
> After their meal the brothers of the monastery rested. M. and Chunilal
> were conversing. Chunilal told M. of his first visit to Sri
> Ramakrishna at Dakshineswar. He also told him how at one time he had
> felt disgusted with the world, had renounced it, and had wandered
> about in holy places. A few minutes later Narendra came and sat by
> them. He asked the younger Gopal to prepare a smoke for him. The
> latter had been meditating. Narendra said to him: \"I say! Prepare a
> smoke. What do you mean by this meditation?
>
> First of all prepare yourself for spiritual life by serving God and
> holy men; then you will be able to meditate.
>
> First of all karma, and then meditation.\" Everybody laughed.
>
> There was a big plot of wooded land to the west of the monastery
> compound. M. was seated alone under a tree, when suddenly Prasanna
> appeared. It was about three o\'clock in the afternoon.

1.  \"Where have you been all these days? Everyone has been so worried
    about you. Have you seen the brothers? When did you arrive?\"

> PRASANNA: \"Just now. Yes, I have seen them.\"

1.  \"You left a note saying that you were going to Vrindāvan. We were
    terribly worried about you. How far did you go?\"

> PRASANNA: \"Only as far as Konnagar.\"

Both of them laughed.

M: \"Sit down. Tell me all about it. Where did you stop first?\"

PRASANNA: \"At the Dakshineswar temple garden. I spent one night
there.\"

M. (smiling): \"What is Hazra\'s present mood?\"

PRASANNA: \"Hazra asked me, \'What do you think of me?\'\"

Both laughed.

M. (smiling): \"What did you say?\"

PRASANNA: \"I said nothing.\"

M: \"Then?\"

PRASANNA: \"Then he asked me whether I had brought tobacco for him.\"

Both laughed.

PRASANNA: \"He wanted me to wait on him.\" (Laughter.)

M: \"Where did you go next?\"

PRASANNA; \"By degrees I got to Konnagar. I spent the night in the open.
I intended to proceed farther and asked some gentlemen whether I could
procure enough money there for a railway ticket to the up-country.\"

M: \"What did they say?\"

PRASANNA: \"They said, \'You may get a rupee or so; but who will give
you the whole fare?\'\"

Both laughed.

M: \"What did you take with you?\"

PRASANNA: \"Oh, one or two pieces of cloth and a picture of the Master.
I didn\'t show the picture to anybody.\"

**About Śaśi**

Śaśi\'s father came to the Math. He wanted to take his son home. During
Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness Śaśi had nursed the Master for nine months
with unswerving zeal. He had won a scholarship in the Entrance
Examination for his academic ability and had studied up to the B.A., but
he had not appeared at the examination. His father, a poor brahmin, was
a devout Hindu and spent much of his time in spiritual practice. Śaśi
was his eldest son. His parents had hoped that, after completing his
education, he would earn money and remove the family\'s financial
difficulties. But Śaśi had renounced the world for the realization of
God. Whenever he thought of his father and mother he felt great anguish
of heart. Many a time he said to his friends, with tears in his eyes:
\"I am at a loss as to my duty. Alas, I could not serve my parents; I
could not be of any use to them. What great hope they placed in me! On
account of our poverty my mother did not have any jewelry. I cherished
the desire to buy some for her. But now all my hopes are frustrated; it
is impossible for me to return home. My Master asked me to renounce
\'woman and gold\'. I simply cannot return home.\"

After Sri Ramakrishna\'s passing away Śaśi\'s father had hoped that his
son would come back to his family. The boy had spent a few days at home,
but immediately after the establishment of the new monastery he had
begun to frequent it and, after a few days, had decided to remain there
as one of the members. Every now

> and then his father came to the monastery to persuade him to come
> home; but he had not succeeded.
>
> This day, on learning that his father had come, Śaśi fled the
> monastery by another door. He did not want to meet him.
>
> Śaśi\'s father knew M. They paced the upper verandah together and
> talked.
>
> ŚAŚI\'S FATHER: \"Who is in charge of this place? Narendra alone is
> the cause of all the mischief. For a while all these young men
> returned home and devoted themselves to their studies.\"

1.  \"There is no master here. They are all equals. What can Narendra
    do? Can a man renounce home against his own will? Have we
    householders, for instance, been able to give up our homes
    altogether?\"

> ŚAŚI\'S FATHER: \"You are doing the right thing. You are serving both
> the world and God. Can\'t one practise religion after your method?
> That is exactly what we want Śaśi to do. Let him live at home and come
> here too. You have no idea how much his mother weeps for him.\"
>
> M. became sad and said nothing.
>
> ŚAŚI\'S FATHER: \"And if you speak of searching for holy men, I know
> where to find a good one. Let Śaśi go to him.\"
>
> **Rākhāl \'s yearning for God**
>
> Rākhāl and M. were walking on the verandah to the east of Kāli
> Tapasvi\'s room.

RĀKHĀL (earnestly): \"M., let us practise *sādhanā*! We have renounced
home for good. When someone says, \'You have not realized God by
renouncing home; then why all this fuss?\', Narendra gives a good
retort. He says, \'Because we could not attain Ram, must we live with
Shyam and beget children?\' Ah! Every now and then Narendra says nice
things. You had better ask him.\"

> M: \"What you say is right. I see that you too have become restless
> for God.\"
>
> RĀKHĀL : \"M., how can I describe the state of my mind? Today at
> noontime I felt great yearning for the Narmada. M., please practise
> *sādhanā*; otherwise you will not succeed. Even Sukadeva was afraid of
> this world. That is why immediately after his birth he fled the world.
> His father asked him to wait, but he ran straight away.\"

1.  \"Yes, the Yogopanishad describes how Sukadeva fled this world of
    > māyā. It also describes Vyāsa\'s conversation with Suka. Vyāsa
    > asked his son to practise religion in the world. But Suka said
    > that the one essential thing is the Lotus Feet of God. He also
    > expressed his disgust with worldly men for getting married and
    > living with women.\"

> RĀKHĀL : \"Many people think that it is enough not to look at the face
> of a woman. But what will you gain merely by turning your eyes to the
> ground at the sight of a woman? Narendra put it very well last night,
> when he said: \'Woman exists for a man as long as he has lust. Free
> from lust, one sees no difference between man and woman.\' \"
>
> M: \"How true it is! Children do not see the difference between man
> and woman.\"
>
> RĀKHĀL : \"Therefore I say that we must practise spiritual discipline.
> How can one attain Knowledge without going beyond māyā?
>
> \"Let\'s go to the big hall. Some gentlemen have come from Barangore.
> Narendra is talking with them. Let\'s go and listen to him.\"
>
> M. did not enter the room. As he was pacing outside he overheard some
> of the conversation.

NARENDRA: \"There is no fixed time or place for the *Sandhya* and other
devotions.\"

GENTLEMAN: \"Sir, can one realize God through spiritual practice
alone?\"

NARENDRA: \"Realization depends on God\'s grace. Sri Krishna says in the
Gitā: The Lord, O Arjuna, dwells in the hearts of all beings, causing
them, by His māyā, to revolve as if mounted on a machine. Take refuge in
Him with all thy heart, O Bharata. By His grace wilt thou attain Supreme
Peace and the Eternal Abode.

\"Without the grace of God mere worship and prayer do not help at all.
Therefore one should take refuge in Him.\"

GENTLEMAN: \"May we come now and then and disturb you?\"

NARENDRA: \"Please come whenever you like. We take our baths in the
Ganges at your ghat.\"

GENTLEMAN: \"I don\'t mind that. But please see that others don\'t use
it.\"

NARENDRA: \"We shall not use your ghat, if that is what you mean\"

GENTLEMAN: \"No, I don\'t mean exactly that. But if you see other people
using it, then you had better not go.\"

It was dusk. The evening worship was over. The devotees, as usual, sang
in chorus, \"Jaya Śiva Omkara\". Afterwards they assembled in the room
of the \"Dānās\". M., too, was seated there. Prasanna was reading from
the Guru Gitā.

Narendra sang:

> *I salute the Eternal Teacher, who is the Embodiment of the Bliss of
> Brahman,*
>
> *The Essence of knowledge and liberation, the Giver of Supreme Joy;*
>
> *Who is all-pervading, like the Ākāśa, and is the goal of the
> Vedānta\'s teachings;*
>
> *Who is One, eternal, stainless, pure, and is the constant Witness of
> all things;*
>
> *Who dwells beyond all moods, transcending the three Gunās.*

Narendra sang again:

> *There is none, higher than the Guru, none better than the Guru;*
>
> *This is what Śiva has declared.*
>
> *I shall sing of the blessed Guru, the Supreme Brahman;*
>
> *I shall worship the blessed Guru, the Supreme Brahman;*
>
> *I shall meditate on the blessed Guru, the Supreme Brahman;*
>
> *I shall bow down to the blessed Guru, the Supreme Brahman.*

As Narendra sang these verses from the Guru Gitā in his melodious voice,
the minds of the devotees became steady, like a candle-flame in a
windless place.

Rākhāl was seated in Kāli Tapasvi\'s room. Prasanna sat near him. M.,
too, was there.

Rākhāl had renounced the world, leaving behind his wife and child. A
fire of intense renunciation burnt day and night in his heart. He was
thinking seriously of going away, by himself, to the bank of the Narmada
or some other holy place. Still, he was trying to persuade Prasanna not
to run away from the monastery.

RĀKHĀL (to Prasanna): \"Where do you want to go, running away from here?
Here you are in the company of holy men. Wouldn\'t it be foolish to run
away from this? Where will you find another like Narendra?\"

PRASANNA: \"My parents live in Calcutta. I am afraid of being drawn by
their love: That is why I want to flee to

a distant place.\"

RĀKHĀL : \"Can our parents love us as intensely as Gurumaharaj \[meaning
Sri Ramakrishna\] did? What have we done for him, to deserve all this
love? Why was he so eager for our welfare in body, mind, and soul? What
have we done for him, to deserve all this?\"

M. (to himself): \"Ah! Rākhāl is right. Therefore a person like Sri
Ramakrishna is described as the \'Ocean of Mercy without any reason\'.\"

PRASANNA (to Rākhāl ): \"Don\'t you yourself feel like running away from
here?\"

RĀKHĀL : \"Yes, now and then I have a fancy to spend a few days on the
bank of the Narmada. I say to

myself, \'Let me go to a place like that and practise *sādhanā* in a
garden.\' Again, I feel a strong desire to practise the *Panchatapa* for
three days. But I hesitate to live in a garden that belongs to worldly
people.\"

**Tārak and Prasanna**

Tārak and Prasanna were talking in the room of the \"Dānās\". Tārak had
lost his mother. His father, like Rākhāl \'s father, had married a
second time. Tārak himself had married but had lost his wife. Now the
monastery was his home. He too was trying to persuade Prasanna to live
there.

PRASANNA: \"I have neither jnāna nor prema. What have I in the world for
a support?\"

TĀRAK: \"It is no doubt difficult to attain jnāna; but how can you say
you have no prema?\"

PRASANNA: \"I have not yet wept for God. How can I say I have prema?
What have I realized in all these days?\"

TĀRAK: \"But you have seen the Master. And why do you say that you have
no jnāna?\"

PRASANNA: \"What sort of jnāna are you talking about? Jnāna means
Knowledge. Knowledge of what? Certainly of God. But I am not even sure
of the existence of God.\"

TĀRAK: \"Yes, that\'s true. According to the Jnāni, there is no God.\"

M. (to himself): \"Ah! The Master used to say that those who seek God
pass through the state that Prasanna is now experiencing. In that state
sometimes one doubts the very existence of God. I understand that Tārak
is now reading Buddhistic philosophy. That is why he says that according
to the Jnāni God does not exist. But Sri Ramakrishna used to say that
the Jnāni and the bhakta will ultimately arrive at the same
destination.\"

**Narendra asks Prasanna to practise self-surrender**

*N*arendra and Prasanna were talking in the meditation room. Rākhāl ,
Harish, and the younger Gopal were seated in another part of the room.
After a while the elder Gopal came in. Narendra was reading from the
Gitā and explaining the verses to Prasanna:

*The Lord, O Arjuna, dwells in the hearts of all beings, causing them,
by His māyā, to revolve as if mounted on a machine. Take refuge in Him
with all thy heart, O Bharata. By His grace wilt thou attain Supreme
Peace and the take refuge in Me alone. I shall liberate thee from all
sins. Eternal Abode. Relinquishing all dharmas, Grieve not.*

NARENDRA: \"Did you notice what Krishna said? *\'Mounted on a
machine.\'* The Lord, by His māyā, causes all beings to revolve as if
mounted on a machine. To seek to know God? You are but a worm among
worms-and you to know God? Just reflect a moment: what is a man? It is
said that each one of the myriads of stars that shine overhead
represents a solar system. This earth of ours is a part of only one
solar system, and even that is too big for us. Like an insect man walks
about on this earth, which, compared to the sun, is only a tiny

ball.\"

Narendra sang:

> *We are born, O Lord, in the dust of earth,*
>
> *And our eyes are blinded by the dust;*
>
> *With dust we toy like children at play:*
>
> *O give us assurance, Thou Help of the weak!*
>
> *Wilt Thou cast us out of Thy lap, O Lord,*
>
> *For a single mistake? Wilt Thou turn away*
>
> *And abandon us to our helplessness?*
>
> *Oh, then we shall never be able to rise,*
>
> *But shall lie for ever dazed and undone.*
>
> *Mere babes are we, Father, with baby minds;*
>
> *At every step we stumble and fall.*
>
> *Why, then, must Thou show us Thy terrible face?*
>
> *Why, Lord, must we ever behold Thy frown?*
>
> *Small are we-oh, do not be angry with us,*
>
> *But tenderly speak to us when we do wrong;*
>
> *For though Thou dost raise us a hundred times,*
>
> *A hundred times we shall fall again!*
>
> *What else can one do with a helpless mind?*

Then he said to Prasanna: \"Surrender yourself at His feet. Resign your
self completely to His will.\"

Narendra sang again in an ecstatic mood:

> *O Lord, I am Thy servant, I am Thy servant! Thy servant am I!*
>
> *O Lord, Thou art my Master, Thou art my Master! My Master art Thou!*
>
> *From Thee I have received two pieces of bread and a kaupin;*
>
> *When I sing Thy name, devotion wells up in my heart and shields me
> from harm.*
>
> *Thou art the Master, the All-compassionate; this I repeat, O Lord!*
>
> *Thy servant Kabir has taken refuge at Thy feet.*

Narendra said to Prasanna: \"Don\'t you remember Sri Ramakrishna\'s
words? God is the hill of sugar and you are but an ant. One grain is
enough to fill your stomach, and you think of bringing home the entire
hill! Don\'t you remember what the Master said about Sukadeva? Even
Sukadeva was a big ant at the most. That is why I scolded Kāli, saying:
\'You fool! Do you want to measure God with your tape and foot-rule?\'

\"God is the Ocean of Mercy. Be His slave and take refuge in Him. He
will show compassion. Pray to Him: \'Protect me always with Thy
compassionate face. Lead me from the unreal to the Real, from darkness
to Light, from death to Immortality. Reveal Thyself to me and protect me
always with Thy compassionate face.\' \"

PRASANNA: \"What kind of spiritual discipline should one practise?\"

NARENDRA: \"Repeat His name. That\'s enough. Don\'t you remember Sri
Ramakrishna\'s song?\"

Narendra sang:

> *O Syama, my only hope is in Thy hallowed name!*
>
> *What need have I of kosha and kushi? What need of smiles and
> conventions?*
>
> *Thy name dissolves death\'s bonds, as Śiva has proclaimed,*
>
> *And I myself am Śiva\'s servant; whom else should I obey?*
>
> *O Mother come what may, I shall repeat Thy name;*
>
> *Why should I fret myself to death? To Śiva\'s words I cling.*

He sang again:

> *Mere babes are we, Father, with baby minds;*
>
> *At every step we stumble and fall.*
>
> *Why, then, must Thou show us Thy terrible face?*
>
> *Why, Lord, must we ever behold Thy frown?*

PRASANNA: \"Now you are saying that there is a God. Again, it is you who
say that according to Chārvāka and many other thinkers the world was
self-created.\"

NARENDRA: \"Haven\'t you studied chemistry? Who combines the different
elements? It is a human hand that combines hydrogen, oxygen, and
electricity to prepare water. Everybody admits the existence of an
Intelligent Force-a Force that is the essence of Knowledge and that
guides all these phenomena.\"

PRASANNA: \"How are we to know that God is kind?\"

NARENDRA: \"The Vedas say, \'That which is Thy compassionate face.\'
John Stuart Mill said the same thing. He said, \'How much kindness must
He have, who has implanted kindness in the hearts of men.\' The Master
used to say: \'Faith is the one essential thing. God exists. He is very
near us. Through faith alone one sees Him.\' \"

Narendra sang:

> *Where are you seeking Me, My servant? I am very close to you.*
>
> *Far away you still are seeking, though I am so very near.*
>
> *I am not in skin or hair, I am not in bones or flesh,*
>
> *Not in mosque and not in temple, not in Kasi or Kailas.*
>
> *Never will you come on Me in Ayodhya or Dwaraka;*
>
> *But you will be sure to find Me if you search where faith abides.*
>
> *Not in pleasant tasks or yoga, not in vairāgya or sannyās,*
>
> *Yet I come without delaying if you only search for Me.*

PRASANNA: \"Sometimes you say that God does not exist, and now you are
saying all these things! You are not consistent. You keep changing your
opinions.\"

All laughed.

NARENDRA: \"All right! I shall never change what I have just said. As
long as one has desires and cravings, so long one doubts the existence
of God. A man cherishes some desire or other. Perhaps he has the desire
to study or pass the university examination or become a scholar, and so
forth and so on.\"

Narendra sang again, in a voice choked with emotion:

> *Hail to Thee, our God and Lord! Hail, Giver of every blessing!*
>
> *Hail, Thou Giver of good!*
>
> *O Redeemer from fear, from danger and suffering!*
>
> *Upholder of the worlds!*
>
> *Hail, Lord! Victory to Thee!*
>
> *Unfathomable and infinite, immeasurable, beyond compare,*
>
> *O God, none equals Thee!*
>
> *Lord of the Universe! O All-pervading Truth!*
>
> *Thou the Ātman Supreme!*
>
> *Hail, Lord! Victory to Thee!*
>
> *O Thou, the All-compassionate One, adored by the whole universe,*
>
> *I bow before Thy feet!*
>
> *Thou art the only Refuge in life and death, O Lord;*
>
> *Before Thy feet I bow!*
>
> *Hail, Lord! Victory to Thee!*
>
> *This is our only prayer, O Lord! What other boon can we implore?*
>
> *Thus do we pray to Thee:*
>
> *Grant us true wisdom here, and in the life hereafter*
>
> *Reveal Thyself to us.*
>
> *Hail, Lord! Victory to Thee!*

Again Narendra sang, describing how very near God is to us-as near as
the musk to the deer-and exhorting his brother disciples to drink deep
from the cup of Divine Bliss:

> *Drinking the Bliss of Hari from the cup of prema,*
>
> *Sādhu, be intoxicated!*
>
> *Childhood you spent in crying, and youth in women\'s control;*
>
> *Now, in your old age, full of phlegm and wind,*
>
> *You wait for the funeral couch to bear you to the cremation ground.*
>
> *Within the musk-deer\'s navel the fragrant musk is found;*
>
> *But how can you make it understand?*
>
> *Without the proper teacher to guide him on his way,*
>
> *Man, too, is blindly roaming through the world,*
>
> *Deluded as the foolish deer that wanders round and round the woods.*

M. heard all this from the verandah.

Narendra got up. As he left the room he remarked, \"My brain is heated
by talking to these youngsters.\"

He met M. on the verandah and said, \"Please, let us have a drink of
water.\"

One of the members of the Math said to Narendra, \"Why, then, do you say
that God does not exist?\"

Narendra laughed.

**Monday, May 9, 1887**

The next morning M. was sitting alone under a tree in the garden. He
said to himself: \"Sri Ramakrishna has made the brothers of the
monastery renounce \'woman and gold\'. Ah, how eager they are to realize
God! This place has become a veritable Vaikuntha, and the brothers
living here are embodiments of Narayana. It is not many days since the
Master passed away; that is why all the ideas and ideals he stood for
are there, almost intact. \'The same Ayodhya-only Rāma is not there.\'
The Master has made these brothers renounce their homes. Why has he kept
a few in the world? Is there no way of liberation for them?\"

**Narendra\'s longing for God-vision**

From a room upstairs Narendra saw M. sitting alone under the tree. He
came down and said with a smile, \"Hello, M.! What are you doing?\"

After a little conversation M. said to him: \"Ah, you have such a sweet
voice. Please sing a hymn.\"

Narendra sang the following hymn to Śiva, in which the devotee prays for
forgiveness for his sins:

*Even before I saw the light of this world, my sins from previous
births,*

*Through which I passed because of desire for the fruit of my deeds,*

*Punished me as I lay in my mother\'s womb.*

*There I was boiled in the midst of filthy things:*

*Who can describe the pain that afflicts the child in its mother\'s
womb?*

*Therefore, O Śiva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions. In childhood my suffering never came to an end;*

*My body was covered with filth and I craved for my mother\'s breasts.*

*Over my body and limbs I had no control;*

*I was pursued by troublesome flies and mosquitoes;*

*Day and night I cried with the pain of many an ailment, forgetting
Thee, O Sankara! Therefore, O Śiva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I
pray, for my transgressions.*

*In youth the venomous snakes of sound, sight, taste, touch, and smell,
Bit into my vitals and slew my discrimination;*

*I was engrossed in the pleasures of wealth, sons, and a youthful wife.*

*Alas! my heart, bereft of the thought of Śiva,*

*Was filled with arrogance and pride.*

*Therefore, O Śiva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.*

*Now in old age my senses have lost the power of proper judging and
acting; My body, though still not wholly bereft of life,*

*Is weak and senile from many afflictions, from sins and illnesses and
bereavements;*

*But even now my mind, instead of meditating on Śiva,*

*Runs after vain desires and hollow delusions.*

*Therefore, O Śiva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.*

*The duties laid down in the smriti-perilous and abstruse-are now beyond
me;*

*How can I speak of the Vedic injunctions for brahmins, as means for
attaining Brahman? Never yet have I rightly grasped, through
discrimination,*

*The meaning of hearing the scriptures from the guru and reasoning on
his instruction; How then can I speak of reflecting on Truth without
interruption?*

*Therefore, O Śiva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.*

*Not even once have I finished my bath before sunrise and brought from
the Ganges Water to bathe Thy holy image;*

*Never, from the deep woods, have I brought the sacred vilwa leaves for
Thy worship; Nor have I gathered full-blown lotuses from the lakes,*

*Nor ever arranged the lights and the incense for worshipping Thee.*

*Therefore, O Śiva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.*

*I have not bathed Thine image with milk and honey, with butter and
other oblations; I have not decked it with fragrant sandal-paste;*

*I have not worshipped Thee with golden flowers, with incense, with
camphor-flame and savoury offerings.*

*Therefore, O Śiva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.*

*I have not made rich gifts to the brahmins, cherishing in my heart, O
Mahadeva, Thy sacred form;*

*I have not made in the sacred fire the million oblations of butter,
Repeating the holy mantra given to me by my guru;*

*Never have I done penance along the Ganges with japa and study of the
Vedas.*

*Therefore, O Śiva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.*

*I have not sat in the lotus posture, nor have I ever controlled The
Prāna along the Sushumna, repeating the syllable Om;*

*Never have I suppressed the turbulent waves of my mind, nor merged the
self-effulgent Om In the ever shining Witness-Consciousness, whose
nature is that of the highest Brahman;*

*Nor have I, in samādhi, meditated on Sankara, who dwells in every form
as the Inner Guide.*

*Therefore, O Śiva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.*

*Never, O Śiva! have I seen Thee, the Pure, the Unattached, the Naked
One, Beyond the three Gunās, free from delusion and darkness, absorbed
in meditation, And ever aware of the true nature of the world;*

*Nor, with a longing heart, have I meditated on Thine auspicious and
sin-destroying form.*

*Therefore, O Śiva! O Mahadeva! O Sambhu! forgive me, I pray, for my
transgressions.*

*O mind, to gain liberation, concentrate wholly on Śiva, The sole
Reality underlying the worlds, the Giver of good;*

*Whose head is illumined by the crescent moon and in whose hair the
Ganges is hidden;*

*Whose fire-darting eyes consumed the god of earthly love; whose throat
and ears are decked with snakes;*

*Whose upper garment is a comely elephant-skin.*

*Of what avail are all the other rituals?*

*O mind, of what avail are wealth or horses, elephants or a kingdom?*

*Of what avail the body or a house?*

*Know all these to be but momentary and quickly shun them;*

*Worship Śiva, as your guru instructs you, for the attaining of Self
Knowledge.*

*Day by day does man come nearer to death;*

*His youth wears away; the day that is gone never returns.*

*Almighty Time devours everything;*

*Fickle as lightning is the goddess of fortune.*

*O Śiva! O Giver of shelter to those that come to Thee for refuge!*

*Protect me, who have taken refuge at Thy feet.*

*I salute the ever auspicious Śiva, the Home of Peace,*

*Who sits in the lotus posture; who has five mouths and three eyes;*

*Who holds in both His hands weapons and gong and drum;*

*Who is bedecked with many an ornament;*

*Whose skin is clear as crystal; who is Parvati\'s Lord.*

*I salute the self-effulgent Guru of the gods, the Lord of Uma; I salute
the Cause of the Universe;*

*I salute the Lord of beasts, adorned with snakes;*

*I salute Śiva, whose three eyes shine like the sun, the moon, and
fire;*

*I salute the Beloved of Krishna; I salute Sankara, who bestows boons on
His devotees and gives them shelter; I salute the auspicious Śiva.*

*O Śiva! White is Thy body, covered with ashes; white shine Thy teeth
when Thou smilest! White is the skull Thou holdest in Thy hand; white is
Thy club, which threatens the wicked! White is the bull on which Thou
ridest; white are the rings that hang from Thine ears! White appear Thy
matted locks, covered with the form of the Ganges; White shines the moon
on Thy forehead!*

*May He who is all white, all pure, bestow on me the treasure of
forgiveness for my transgressions!*

*O Śiva, forgive all the sins that I have committed*

*With hands or feet, with words or body, with ears or eyes, with mind or
heart;*

*Forgive my sins, those past and those that are yet to come! Victory
unto Śiva, the Ocean of Compassion, the Great God, the Abode of
Blessedness!*

After the hymn Narendra and M. talked again.

NARENDRA: \"You may speak of leading a detached life in the world, and
all that, but you will not attain anything unless you renounce \'woman
and gold\'. Don\'t you feel disgusted with your wife\'s body?

Fools enjoy the contact of the body, filled with filth, peopled with
worms, foul of smell by nature, made of flesh, blood, bone, and marrow;
but the wise shun it.

\"Vain is the life of a person who does not take delight in the
teachings of Vedānta and drink the Nectar of Divine Bliss. Listen to a
song.\"

Narendra sang:

> *O man, abandon your delusion! Cast aside your wicked counsels! Know
> the Lord and free yourself from earthly suffering! For a few days\'
> pleasure only, you have quite forgotten Him Who is the Comrade of your
> soul. Alas, what mockery!*

\"No liberation is possible for a man unless he puts on the loin-cloth
of a sannyāsi. The world must be renounced.\"

Narendra sang from the Five Stanzas on the glory of the monk\'s loin
cloth:

> *Roaming ever in the grove of Vedānta,*
>
> *Ever pleased with his beggar\'s morsel*
>
> *Ever walking with heart free from sorrow,*
>
> *Blest indeed is the wearer of the loin-cloth. . . .*

Continuing, Narendra said: \"Why should a man be entangled in
worldliness? Why should he be ensnared by māyā? What is man\'s real
nature? He is the blessed Śiva, the Embodiment of Bliss and Spirit.\"

He sang Sankaracharya\'s Six Stanzas on Nirvāna:

> *Om. I am neither mind, intelligence, ego, nor chitta,*
>
> *Neither ears nor tongue nor the senses of smell and sight;*
>
> *Nor am I ether, earth, fire, water, or air:*
>
> *I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva! . .*

Narendra recited another hymn, the Eight Stanzas on the glory of
Krishna:

> *I am consumed with false desires and wrapped in the sleep of lust:
> Save me, O*
>
> *Madhusudana!*
>
> *Thou art my only Refuge, Lord! I have no other salvation.*
>
> *I am entrapped in the mire of sin:*
>
> *O Madhusudana, redeem me!*
>
> *I am ensnared in the net of love for children, wife, and home:*
>
> *Save me, O Madhusudana!*
>
> *I am without devotion, helpless, smitten by wrong desire,*
>
> *Afflicted with grief and misery:*
>
> *O Madhusudana, redeem me!*
>
> *Lord, I have neither master nor place of shelter to call my own: Save
> me, O*
>
> *Madhusudana!*
>
> *Utterly wearied out am I by all this going and coming*
>
> *Along the endless road of life:*
>
> *O Madhusudana, redeem me!*
>
> *From this hard and unavailing journey through life and death,*
>
> *Save me, O Madhusudana!*
>
> *Many the births that I have seen in many a bodily form,*
>
> *And painful it is in the mother\'s womb:*
>
> *O Madhusudana, redeem me!*
>
> *To Thee I come for salvation out of the cycle of existence:*
>
> *Save me, O Madhusudana!*
>
> *For I am terrified alike of old age and of death:*
>
> *I come to Thee for shelter, Lord!*
>
> *O Madhusudana, redeem me!*
>
> *Never a good deed have I done, but many have been my sins:*
>
> *Save me, O Madhusudana!*
>
> *Headlong have I fallen into the mire of worldliness;*
>
> *Countless the births I have endured:*
>
> *O Madhusudana, redeem me!*
>
> *I have lorded it over men but happiness is not there:*
>
> *Save me, O Madhusudana!*
>
> *What my words have promised, my deeds have never carried out;*
>
> *Lord, I am full of wretchedness:*
>
> *O Madhusudana, redeem me!*
>
> *If as a man or a woman I must be born again and again-*
>
> *Save me, O Madhusudana!-*
>
> *May my devotion be unswerving to Thy feet, O Lord!*
>
> *From the delusion of this world,*
>
> *O Madhusudana, redeem me!*

M. remained spellbound as he listened to these hymns sung by Narendra.
He said to himself: \"How intense Narendra\'s dispassion is! This is how
he has infused the spirit of dispassion into the hearts of the other
brothers of the monastery. The very contact with them awakens in the
hearts of the Master\'s householder devotees the desire for renunciation
of \'woman and gold\'. Ah, how blessed are these all-renouncing
brothers! Why has the Master kept us few in the world? Will he show us a
way? Will he give us the spirit of renunciation, or will he delude us
with worldliness?\"

After the meal all were resting. The elder Gopal was copying some songs.
Niranjan was on a visit to his mother. Sarat, Baburam, and Kāli were in
Puri.

Narendra, with one or two brothers, left for Calcutta. He had to see to
his lawsuit. He was going to return in the evening; the brothers could
not bear his absence.

**About Rabindra**

In the afternoon Rabindra arrived, looking like a mad person. He was
barefoot and had only half of his black-bordered cloth round his waist.
His eyeballs were rolling like a madman\'s. All asked him anxiously what
the matter was.

\"Let me recover my breath!\" he said. \"I shall tell you everything
presently. I am certainly not going back home; I shall stay at this very
place with you all. She is certainly a traitor! Let me tell you
something, friends. For her sake I gave up my habit of drinking, which I
had indulged for five years. I have not taken a drop for the last eight
months. And she is a traitor!\" The brothers of the Math said: \"Be
calm, please! How did you come?\"

RABINDRA: \"I have come barefoot all the way from Calcutta.\"

The brothers asked him where he had lost the other half of his cloth.

RABINDRA: \"When I was leaving her place she began to pull at my cloth.
That is how half of it was torn off.\"

The brothers told him to bathe in the Ganges and cool off; then they
would hear his story.

Rabindra belonged to a respectable kayastha family of Calcutta. He was
twenty or twenty-two years old. He had first met Sri Ramakrishna at the
Dakshineswar temple and had received his special blessing. On one
occasion he had spent three nights with the Master. His disposition was
very sweet and tender, and the Master had loved him dearly. Once he had
said to Rabindra: \"You will have to wait some time; you have to go
through a few more experiences. Nothing can be done now. You see, the
police can\'t do much just when the robbers attack a house. When the
plundering is almost over, the police make their arrests.\"

Rabindra had many virtues. He was devoted to God and to service of the
poor. He had many spiritual qualities. But he had walked into the snare
of a prostitute. Now, suddenly, he had discovered that the woman was
being unfaithful to him. Therefore he had come to the Math in this
dishevelled state, resolved not to go back to the world.

A devotee accompanied Rabindra to the Ganges. It was his inmost desire
that Rabindra\'s spiritual consciousness should be awakened in the
company of these holy men. When Rabindra finished his bath, the devotee
took him to the adjacent cremation ground, showed him the corpses lying
about, and said: \"The brothers of the Math come here every now and then
to meditate on God. It is a good place for meditation. Here one sees
clearly that the world is impermanent.\"

Rabindra sat down in the cremation ground to meditate. But he could not
meditate long; his mind was restless.

Rabindra and the devotee returned to the Math. They went to the worship
room to salute the Deity. The devotee said to him, \"The brothers of the
Math meditate in this room.\" Rabindra sat there to meditate, but could
not meditate long there either.

DEVOTEE: \"How do you feel? Is your mind very restless? Is that why you
have got up from your seat? Perhaps you could not concentrate well.\"

RABINDRA: \"I am sure I shall not go back to the world. But the mind is
restless.\"

M. and Rabindra were talking. No one else was present. M. was telling
him stories from the life of Buddha. At that time, the members of the
Math regularly read the lives of Buddha and Chaitanya. M. said to
Rabindra that Buddha\'s spiritual consciousness was first awakened by
hearing a song of some heavenly maidens.

M. sang the song:

> *We moan for rest, alas! but rest can never find;*
>
> *We know not whence we come, nor where we float away.*
>
> *Time and again we tread this round of smiles and tears;*
>
> *In vain we pine to know whither our pathway leads,*
>
> *And why we play this empty play. . . .*

That night Narendra, Tārak, and Harish returned from Calcutta. They
said, \"Oh, what a big meal we had!\" They had been entertained by a
devotee in Calcutta.

The members of the monastery assembled in the room of the \"Dānās\".
Narendra heard Rabindra\'s story. He sang by way of giving instruction
to him:

> *O man, abandon your delusion! Cast aside your wicked counsels!*
>
> *Know the Lord and free yourself from earthly suffering!*
>
> *For a few days\' pleasure only, you have quite forgotten Him Who is
> the Comrade of your soul. Alas, what mockery!*

Narendra sang again:

> *Drinking the Bliss of Hari from the cup of prema,*
>
> *Sādhu, be intoxicated! . . .*

A few minutes later the brothers went to Kāli Tapasvi\'s room. Girish
Ghosh had just sent two of his new books to the monastery: the Life of
Buddha and the Life of Chaitanya.

Since the founding of the new Math Śaśi had devoted himself heart and
soul to the worship and service of the Master. All were amazed at his
devotion. Just as he had tended Sri Ramakrishna\'s physical body during
his illness, so now, with the same unswerving zeal, he worshipped the
Master in the shrine room.

A member of the monastery was reading aloud from the lives of Buddha and
Chaitanya. He was a little sarcastic while reading Chaitanya\'s life.
Narendra snatched the book from his hand and said, \"That is how you
spoil a good thing!\"

Narendra read the chapter describing how Chaitanya gave his love to all,
from the brahmin to the pariah.

A BROTHER: \"I say that one person cannot give love to another person.\"

NARENDRA: \"But the Master gave it to me.\"

BROTHER: \"Well, are you sure you have it?\"

NARENDRA: \"What can you understand about love? You belong to the
servant class. All of you must serve me and massage my feet. Don\'t
flatter yourselves by thinking you have understood everything. Now go
and prepare a smoke for me.\"

All laughed.

THE BROTHER: \"I surely will not.\"

M. (to himself): \"Sri Ramakrishna has transmitted mettle to all the
brothers of the Math. It is no monopoly of Narendra\'s. Is it possible
to renounce \'woman and gold\' without this inner fire?\"

**May 10, 1887**

It was Tuesday, a very auspicious day for the worship of the Divine the
Mother. Arrangements were being made for Her special worship at the
monastery.

M. was going to the Ganges to take his bath. Rabindra was walking alone
on the roof. He heard Narendra singing the Six Stanzas on Nirvāna:

> *Death or fear I have none, nor any distinction of caste;*
>
> *Neither father nor mother nor even a birth have I;*
>
> *Neither friend nor comrade, neither disciple nor guru:*

*I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*

1.  *have no form or fancy; the All-pervading am I; Everywhere I exist,
    > yet I am beyond the senses; Neither salvation am I, nor anything
    > that may be known: I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am
    > Śiva!*

Rabindra went to the Ganges to take his bath. Presently he returned to
the monastery clad in his wet cloth.

Narendra said to M. in a whisper: \"He has bathed in the Ganges. It
would be good to initiate him now into sannyās.\"

Both Narendra and M. smiled.

Prasanna asked Rabindra to change his wet cloth and gave him a dry
*Gerruā* cloth. Narendra said to M., \"Now he is going to put on the
cloth of renunciation.\"

M. (with a smile): \"What kind of renunciation?\"

NARENDRA: \"Why, the renunciation of \'woman and gold\'.\"

Rabindra put on the ochre cloth and entered Kāli Tapasvi\'s room to
meditate.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Appendix A**

KESHAB AT DAKSHINESWAR

> **Saturday, January 1, 1881**

KESHAB CHANDRA SEN, the leader of the Brahmo Samaj, was expected to
visit Sri Ramakrishna at the temple

garden at Dakshineswar. With the Master were many Brahmo
celebrities-Pratap, Trailokya, Jaygopal, and

others. It was only a few days before the annual festival of the Brahmo
Samaj, and the Brahmos were eagerly

awaiting the arrival of their leader, who was to come by steamer. They
were restless and talking rather noisily.

Ram, Manomohan, and several other devotees of .the Master were also
there.

**Keshab\'s reverence for the Master**

At last Keshab entered the Master\'s room with two fruits and a bouquet
of flowers in his hands. Touching the Master\'s feet, he laid the
offering at his side. Then he saluted Sri Ramakrishna with great
reverence, bowing very low before him. Sri Ramakrishna returned in like
manner his distinguished visitor\'s salutation. Then he laughingly began
the conversation.

MASTER: \"You, Keshab, want me; but your disciples don\'t. I was saying
to them: \'Let us be restless. Then Govinda will come.\' (To Keshab\'s
disciples) See, here is your Govinda!

\"We have been showing signs of restlessness all this while to set the
stage for your arrival. It isn\'t easy to have the vision of Govinda.
You must have noticed in the Krishnayatra that Narada enters Vrindavan
and prays with great yearning: \'O Govinda! O my soul! O Life of my
life!\', and then Krishna comes on the stage with the cowherd boys,
followed by the gopis. No one can see God without that yearning.

\"Well, Keshab, say something! They are eager to hear your words.\"

KESHAB (humbly, with a smile): \"To open my lips here would be like
trying to \'sell needles to a blacksmith\'.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"But don\'t you know that the nature of devotees is
like that of hemp-smokers? One hemp-smoker says to another, \'Please
take a puff for yourself and give me one.\'\" (All laugh.)

**Tasting divine bliss in different ways**

It was about four o\'clock in the afternoon. They heard the music from
the nahabat in the temple garden.

MASTER (to Keshab and the others): \"Do you hear how melodious that
music is? One player is producing only a monotone on his flute, while
another is creating waves of melodies in different ragas and raginis.
That is my attitude. Why should I produce only a mortotone when I have
an instrument with seven holes? Why should I say nothing but, \'I am He,
I am He\'? I want to play various melodies on my instrument with seven
holes. Why should I say only, \'Brahma! Brahma!\'? I want to call on God
through all the moods-through santa, dasya, sakhya, vatsalya, and
madhur. I want to make merry with God. I want to sport with God.\"

Keshab listened to these words with wonder in his eyes and said to the
Brahmo devotees, \"I have never before heard such a wonderful and
beautiful interpretation of jnana and bhakti.\"

KESHAB (to the Master): \"How long will you hide yourself in this way? I
dare say people will be thronging here by and by in great crowds.\"

**Master\'s abhorrence of public preaching**

MASTER: \"What are you talking of? I only eat and drink and sing God\'s
name. I know nothing about gathering crowds. Hanuman once declared: \'I
know nothing about the day of the week or the position of the moon and
stars in the sky. I simply meditate on Rama.\'\"

KESHAB: \"All right, sir, I shall gather the crowd. But they all must
come to your place.\"

**Master instructs about humility**

MASTER: \"I am the dust of the dust of everybody\'s feet. If anyone is
gracious enough to come here, he is welcome.\"

KESHAB: \"Whatever you may say, sir, your advent cannot be in vain.\"

In the mean time the devotees had arranged a kirtan. Many of them had
joined it. The party started at the Panchavati and moved toward the
Master\'s room. Hriday blew the horn, Gopidas played the drum, and two
devotees played the cymbals.

Sri Ramakrishna sang:

> *O man, if you would live in bliss, repeat Lord Hari\'s name;*
>
> *Then you will lead a life of joy and go to paradise,*
>
> *And feed upon the fruit of moksha evermore:*
>
> *Such is the glory of His name!*
>
> *I give you the name of Hari, which Siva, God of Gods,*
>
> *Repeats aloud with His five mouths.*

The Master danced with the strength of a lion and went into samadhi.
Regaining consciousness of the outer world, he sat down in his room and
began to talk with Keshab and the other devotees.

MASTER: \"God can be realized through all paths. It is like your coming
to Dakshineswar by carriage, by boat, by steamer, or on foot. You have
chosen the way according to your convenience and taste; but the
destination is the same. Some of you have arrived earlier than others;
but all have arrived.

**Renunciation of \"woman and gold\"**

\"The more you rid yourself of upadhis, the nearer you will feel the
presence of God. Rain-water never collects on a high mound; it collects
only in low land. Similarly, the water of God\'s grace cannot remain on
the high mound of egotism. Before God one should feel lowly and poor.

\"One should be extremely watchful. Even clothes create vanity. I notice
that even a man suffering from an enlarged spleen sings Nidhu Babu\'s
light songs when he is dressed up in a black-bordered cloth. There are
men who spout English whenever they put on high boots. And when an unfit
person puts on an ochre cloth he becomes vain; the slightest sign of
indifference to him arouses his anger and pique.

**Yearning for God**

\"God cannot be seen without yearning of heart, and this yearning is
impossible unless one has finished with the experiences of life. Those
who live surrounded by \'woman and gold\', and have not yet come to the
end of their experiences, do not yearn for God.

\"When I lived at Kamarpukur, Hriday\'s son, a child four or five years
old, used to spend the whole day with me. He played with his toys and
almost forgot everything else. But no sooner did evening come than he
would say, \'I want to go to my mother.\' I would try to cajole him in
various ways and would say, \'Here, I\'ll give you a pigeon.\' But he
wouldn\'t be consoled with such things; he would weep and cry, \'I want
to go to my mother.\' He didn\'t enjoy playing any more. I myself wept
to see his state.

\"One should cry for God that way, like a child. That is what it means
to be restless for God. One doesn\'t enjoy play or food any longer.
After one\'s experiences of the world are over, one feels this
restlessness and weeps for God.\"

The devotees sat in silence, listening to the Master\'s words. When
evening came, a lamp was lighted in the room. Preparations were being
made for feeding Keshab and the devotees.

KESHAB (with a smile): \"What? Puffed rice again today?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Hriday knows.\"

The devotees were served first with puffed rice, and then with luchi and
curries on leaf-plates. All enjoyed the meal very much. It was about ten
o\'clock when supper was over.

The Master went to the Panchavati with Keshab and the devotees.

Master(to Keshab and the others):\"One can very well live in the world
after realizing God. Why don\'t you first touch the \'granny\' and then
play hide-and-seek?

\"After attaining God, a devotee becomes unattached to the world. He
lives like a mudfish. The mudfish keeps its body unstained though it
lives in mud.\"

About eleven o\'clock the Brahmos became eager to go home. Pratap said,
\"It would be nice if we could spend the night here.\"

MASTER (to Keshab): \"Why not stay here tonight?\"

KESHAB (smiling): \"No, I have business to attend to. I must go.\"

**Story of the fishwife and her basket**

MASTER: \"Why must you, my dear sir? Can\'t you sleep without your
fish-basket? Once a fishwife was a guest in a gardener\'s house. She was
asked to sleep in a room full of flowers. But she couldn\'t get any
sleep there. (All laugh.) She was restless and began to fidget about.
The gardener called to her: \'Hello there! Why aren\'t you asleep?\'
\'Oh, I don\'t know\', said the fishwife. \'There are flowers here. The
smell keeps me awake. Can\'t you bring me my fish-basket?\' She
sprinkled a little water in the basket, and when she smelled the fish
she fell fast asleep.\" (All laugh heartily.)

Keshab took a few of the flowers that he had offered at Sri
Ramakrishna\'s feet on his arrival. He and his Brahmo devotees cried out
as the Master, \"Hail, Navavidhan!\" Thus they bade him adieu.

One day during the rainy season of 1881 Sri Ramakrishna and a number of
devotees visited Surendra\'s house.

It was about dusk.

The Master entered the drawing-room on the second floor, where several
of Surendra\'s neighbours had already gathered. Kashab had also been
invited but could not come. Trailokya and a few Brahmo devotees were
present. A mat covered with a white sheet was spread on the floor, and
on it had been placed a beautiful carpet with a cushion. Surendra
requested the Master to sit on the carpet; but Sri Ramakrishna would not
listen to him and sat on the mat next to Mahendra Goswami, one of
Surendra\'s neighbours.

MAHENDRA (to the devotees): \"For several months I spent most of my time
with him \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\]. I have never before seen such a
great man. His spiritual moods are not of the ordinary kind.\"

MASTER (to Mahendra): \"How dare you say that? I am the most
insignificant of the insignificant, the lowliest of the lowly. I am the
servant of the servants of God. Krishna alone is great.

**Personal God and Impersonal Reality**

\"Krishna is none other than Satchidananda, the Indivisible Brahman. The
water of the ocean looks blue from a distance. Go near it and you will
find it colourless. He who is endowed with attributes is also without
attributes. The Absolute and the Relative belong to the same Reality.

\"Why is Krishna tribhanga, bent in three places? Because of His love
for Radha.

\"That which is Brahman is also Kali, the Adyasakti, who creates,
preserves, and destroys the universe. He who

is Krishna is the same as Kali. The root is one-all these are His sport
and play.

**The pure mind sees God**

\"God can be seen. He can be seen through the pure mind and the pure
intelligence. Through attachment to \'woman and gold\' the mind becomes
impure.

\"The mind is everything. It is like a white cloth just returned from
the laundry. It will take any colour you dye it with. Knowledge is of
the mind, and ignorance is also of the mind. When you say that a certain
person has become impure, you mean that impurity has coloured his
mind.\"

**Surendra\'s vanity curbed**

Surendra approached the Master with a garland and wanted to put it
around his neck. But the Master took it in his hand and threw it aside.
Surendra\'s pride was wounded and his eyes filled with tears. He went to
the west porch and sat with Ram, Manomohan, and the others. In a voice
choked with sadness he said: \"I am really angry. How can a poor brahmin
know the value of a thing like that? I spent a lot of money for that
garland, and he refused to accept it. I was unable to control my anger
and said that the other garlands were to be given away to the devotees.
Now I realize it was all my fault. God cannot be bought with money; He
cannot be possessed by a vain person. I have really been vain. Why
should he accept my worship? I don\'t feel like living any more,\" Tears
streamed down his cheeks and over his chest.

In the mean time Trailokya was singing inside the room. The Master began
to dance in an ecstasy of joy. He put around his neck the garland that
he had thrown aside; holding it with one hand, he swung it with the
other as he danced and sang. Now Surendra\'s joy was unbounded. The
Master had accepted his offering. Surendra said to himself, \"God
crushes one\'s pride, no doubt, but He is also the cherished treasure of
the humble and lowly.\"

The Master now sang:

> *Behold, the two brothers have come, who weep while chanting Hari\'s
> name,*
>
> *The brothers who, in return for blows, offer to sinners Hari\'s
> love!*
>
> *Behold them, drunk with Hari\'s love, who make the world drunk as
> well,*
>
> *Embracing everyone as brother, even the outcaste shunned by men.*
>
> *Behold, the two brothers have come, who once were Kanai and Balai of
> Braja.. . .*

Many of the devotees danced while Sri Ramakrishna sang this song.

When the kirtan was over, everyone sat around the Master and became
engaged in pleasant conversation. Sri Ramakrishna said to Surendra,
\"Won\'t you give me something to eat?\" Then he went into the inner
apartments, where the ladies saluted him. After the meal Sri Ramakrishna
left for Dakshineswar.

**Saturday, December 3, 1881**

In the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna paid a visit to his householder
disciple Manomohan, at 23 Simla Street, Calcutta. It was a small
two-storey house with a courtyard. The Master was seated in the
drawing-room on the first floor. Ishan of Bhawanipur asked him: \"Sir,
why have you renounced the world? The scriptures extol the
householder\'s life as the best.\"

MASTER: \"I don\'t know much about what is good and what is bad. I do
what God makes me do and speak what He makes me speak.\"

ISHAN: \"If everybody renounced the world, they would be acting against
God\'s will\"

MASTER: \"Why should everybody renounce? On the other hand, can it be
the will of God that all should revel in \'woman and gold\' like dogs
and jackals? Has He no other wish? Do you know what accords with His
will and what is against it?

\"You say that God wants everybody to lead a worldly life. But why
don\'t you see it as God\'s will when your wife and children die? Why
don\'t you see His will in poverty, when you haven\'t a morsel to eat?

**Maya obstructs vision of God**

\"Maya won\'t allow us to know the will of God. On account of God\'s
maya the unreal appears as real, and the real as unreal. The world is
unreal. This moment it exists and the next it disappears. But on account
of His maya it seems to be real. It is only through His maya that the
ego seems to be the doer. Furthermore, on account of this maya a man
regards his wife and children, his brother and sister, his father and
mother, his house and property, as his very own.

\"There are two aspects of maya: vidya and avidya. Avidya deludes one
with worldliness, and vidya-wisdom, devotion, and the company of holy
men-leads one to God.

\"He who has gone beyond maya, through the grace of God, views alike
both *Vidyā* and *Avidyā*. Worldly life is a life of enjoyment. After
all, what is there to enjoy in \'woman and gold\'? As soon as a
sweetmeat has gone down the throat, one doesn\'t remember whether it
tasted sweet or sour.

\"But why should everybody renounce?

**Renunciation, true and false**

Is renunciation possible except in the fullness of time? The time for
renunciation comes when one reaches the limit of enjoyment. Can anybody
force himself into renunciation? There is a kind of renunciation known
as \'monkey renunciation\'. Only small-minded people cultivate it. Take
the case of a fatherless boy. His poor widowed mother earns her
livelihood by spinning. The boy loses his insignificant job and suddenly
is seized with a fit of renunciation. He puts on the ochre cloth of a
monk and goes to Benares. A few days later he writes home, \'I have
secured a job for ten rupees a month.\' In the mean time he tries to buy
a gold ring and beautiful clothes. How can he stifle his desire for
enjoyment?\"

Keshab arrived with some Brahmo devotees and respectfully saluted the
Master. He took a seat on Sri Ramakrishna\'s left, Ram on his right. For
some time a reader recited from the Bhagavata and explained the text.

**God and worldly duties**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"It is very difficult to do one\'s duty in
the world. If you whirl round too fast you feel giddy and faint; but
there is no such fear if you hold on to a post. Do your duty, but do not
forget God.

\"You may ask, \'If worldly life is so difficult, then what is the
way?\' The way is constant practice. At Kamarpukur I have seen the women
of the carpenter families flattening rice with a husking-machine. They
are always fearful of the pestle\'s smashing their fingers; and at the
same time they go on nursing their children and bargaining with
customers. They say to the customers, \'Pay us what you owe before you
leave.\'

\"An immoral woman goes on performing her household duties, but all the
time her mind dwells on her sweetheart.

\"But one needs spiritual discipline to acquire such a state of mind;
one should pray to God in solitude every now and then. It is possible to
perform worldly duties after obtaining love for God. If you try to break
a jackfruit, your hands will be smeared with its sticky juice. But that
won\'t happen if, beforehand, you rub them with oil.\"

The kirtan began. Trailokya was singing. The Master danced, Keshab and
the other devotees dancing with him. Though it was winter, the Master
became hot and perspired. After the music he wanted something to eat. A
plate of sweetmeats was sent from the inner apartments. Keshab held the
plate before Sri Ramakrishna and the Master ate. When he had finished,
Keshab poured water on his hands and then dried the Master\'s hands

and face with a towel. Afterwards he began to fan the Master.

MASTER (to Keshab and the other devotees): \"They are heroes indeed who
can pray to God in the midst of their worldly activities. They are like
men who strive for God-realization while carrying heavy loads on their
heads. Such men are real heroes. You may say that this is extremely
difficult. But is there anything, however hard, that cannot be achieved
through God\'s grace? His grace makes even the impossible possible. If a
lamp is brought into a room that has been dark a thousand years, does it
illumine the room little by little? The room is lighted all at once.\"

These reassuring words gladdened the hearts of Keshab and the other
householder devotees.

KESHAB (to Rajendra Mitra, the uncle of Ram and Manomohan): \"Wouldn\'t
it be nice if you could arrange a festival like this at your house one
day?\"

RAJENDRA: \"Very good, I will. Well, Ram, you\'ll have to take charge of
everything.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was asked to go to the inner apartments, where
Manomohan\'s mother had prepared his meal.

A glass of ice-water, of which the Master was very fond, was placed near
his plate.

Keshab and the other devotees sat in the courtyard and were treated to a
sumptuous feast. The Master joined them and watched them eat. He danced
and sang to entertain the guests.

When it was time for Sri Ramakrishna to leave for Dakshineswar, Keshab
and the other devotees took the dust of his feet and saw him off in a
hired carriage.

**Saturday, December 10, 1881**

At Keshab\'s request Rajendra Mitra arranged a religious festival at his
home in Calcutta and invited Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees, including
the members of the Brahmo Samaj.

Two days before, Aghorenath, a prominent member of the Brahmo Samaj, had
suddenly passed away in Lucknow. Keshab and the other Brahmo devotees
were in mourning, and Rajendra thought they could not possibly join in
the festival at his house. This worried him. But Ram, the Master\'s
devotee, said to him: \"Why are you so sad? If Keshab can\'t come, let
him stay away. Our Master will be here. He is always in communion with
God. He enables one to see God. And his presence will make the festival
a success.\"

Rajendra, accompanied by Ram and a few others, paid Keshab a visit to
express their condolence for the death of Aghorenath. Keshab said to
Rajendra: \"Why, I haven\'t said I shall not join in the festival at
your house. Sri Ramakrishna will be there; so how can I stay away? I am
in mourning, it is true, but I shall come.\"

On the wall in Keshab\'s room hung a picture of Sri Ramakrishna absorbed
in samiidhi.

RAJENDRA (to Keshab): \"Many people say that he (pointing to the
picture) is an incarnation of Chaitanya.\"

KESHAB (looking at the picture): \"One doesn\'t see such samadhi. Only
men like Christ, Mohammed, and Chaitanya experienced it.\"

About three o\'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna arrived at
Manomohan\'s house. He rested there awhile and had some refreshments.
Surendra took the Master in a carriage to the studio of the Bengal
Photographer. The art of photography was explained to him, and he was
shown how glass covered with silver nitrate takes the image. As the
Master was being photographed he went into samadhi.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna arrived at Rajendra Mitra\'s house.
Keshab had not yet come, and Mahendra Goswami was reading from the
Bhagavata. The Master conversed with the devotees.

MASTER: \"Why shouldn\'t one be able to lead a spiritual life in the
world? But it is extremely difficult. While

coming here I passed over the bridge at Baghbazar. How many chains it is
tied with! Nothing will happen if one chain is broken, for there are so
many others to keep it in place. Just so, there are many ties on a
worldly man. There is no way for him to get rid of them except through
the grace of God.

\"One need not be afraid of the world after one has had the vision of
God. Both vidya and avidya exist in His maya; but one becomes
indifferent to them after realizing God. One understands it rightly
after attaining the state of a paramahamsa. Only a swan can discard the
water and drink the milk from a mixture of milk and water. A robin
cannot do so.\"

**Faith in the guru**

A DEVOTEE: \"Then what is the way for a householder?\"

MASTER: \"Faith in the guru\'s words. You should depend on his
instruction. Do your duties in the world, holding fast to his words,
like a person whirling round and holding fast to a pillar.

\"One must not look on one\'s guru as a mere human being: it is
Satchidananda Himself who appears as the guru. When the disciple has the
vision of the Ishta, through the guru\'s grace, he finds the guru
merging in Him.

\"What can one not achieve through simple faith! Once there was an
annaprasana ceremony in a guru\'s house. His disciples volunteered,
according to their powers, to supply the different articles of food. He
had one disciple, a very poor widow, who owned a cow. She milked it and
brought the guru a jar of milk. He had thought she would take charge of
all the milk and curd for the festival. Angry at her poor offering, he
threw the milk away and said to her, \'Go and drown yourself.\' The
widow accepted this as his command and went to the river to drown
herself. But God was pleased with her guileless faith and, appearing
before her, said: \'Take this pot of curd. You will never be able to
empty it. The more curd you pour out, the more will come from the pot.
This will satisfy your teacher.\' The guru was speechless with amazement
when the pot was given to him. After hearing from the widow the story of
the pot, he went to the river, saying to her, \'I shall drown myself if
you cannot show God to me.\' God appeared then and there, but the guru
could not see Him. Addressing God, the widow said, \'If my teacher gives
up his body because Thou dost not reveal Thyself to him, then I too
shall die.\' So God appeared to the guru-but only once.

\"Now you see, because of faith in her guru the disciple herself had the
vision of God and also showed Him to her teacher. Therefore I say,
\'Even though my guru frequents a grog-shop, still to me he is the
embodiment of Eternal Bliss.\'

\"All want to be the guru, but very few indeed want to be the disciple.
But you know that rain-water doesn\'t collect on a high mound; it
collects in low land, in a hollow.

**Parable of pearl oyster**

\"One should have faith in the holy name given by the guru and with it
practise spiritual discipline. It is said that the pearl oyster makes
itself ready for the rain that falls when the star Svati is in the
ascendant. Taking a drop of that rain, it dives into the fathomless
depths of the ocean and remains there until the pearl is formed.\"

At the sight of the many Brahmo devotees assembled there, the Master
said: \"Is the meeting of the Brahmos a real devotional gathering or a
mere show? It is very good that the Brahmo Samaj holds regular
devotions. But one must dive deep; mere ceremonial worship or lectures
are of no avail. One should pray to God that one\'s attachment to
worldly enjoyment may disappear; that one may have pure love for His
Lotus Feet.

\"The elephant has outer tusks and inner grinders as well. The tusks are
mere ornaments; but the elephant chews its food with the grinders. The
inner enjoyment of \'woman and gold\' injures the growth of one\'s
devotion.

\"What will you achieve through mere public lectures? The vulture
undoubtedly soars high, but its eyes are fixed

on the charnel-pit. The rocket undoubtedly shoots up into the sky, but
the next moment it falls to the ground.

\"He who has renounced his attachment to worldly enjoyments will
remember nothing but God in the hour of death. Otherwise he will think
only of worldly things: wife, children, house, wealth, name and fame.
Through practice a bird can be trained to repeat \'Radha-Krishna\'; but
when a cat catches it, it only squawks.

\"Therefore one should constantly practise the singing of God\'s name
and glories, and meditation and contemplation as well. And further, one
should always pray that one\'s attachment to the world may disappear and
one\'s love for God\'s Lotus Feet may grow.

\"Householders devoted to God live in the world like a maidservant, who
performs her duties for her master but always keeps her mind fixed on
her own native village; that is to say, they do their duties in the
world keeping their minds on God. Anyone leading a worldly life is sure
to come in contact with its dirt; but a householder who is a true
devotee of God lives like the mudfish, which, though remaining in the
mud, is not stained by it.

\"Brahman and Sakti are identical. One acquires love and devotion
quickly by calling on God as Mother.\"

Saying this, the Master sang:

> *High in the heaven of the Mother\'s feet, my mind was soaring like a
> kite,*
>
> *When came a blast of sin\'s rough wind that drove it swiftly toward
> the earth.*
>
> *Maya disturbed its even flight by bearing down upon one side,*
>
> *And I could make it rise no more.*
>
> *Entangled in the twisting string of love for children and for wife,
> Alas! my kite was rent in twain.*
>
> *It lost its crest of wisdom soon and downward plunged as I let it
> go;*
>
> *How could it hope to fly again, when all its top was torn away?*
>
> *Though fastened with devotion\'s cord, it came to grief in playing
> here;*
>
> *Its six opponents worsted it.*
>
> *Now Nareschandra rues this game of smiles and tears, and thinks it
> better Never to have played at all.*

He sang again:

> *O Mother, for Yasoda Thou wouldst dance, when she called Thee her
> precious \"Blue*
>
> *Jewel\":*
>
> *Where hast Thou hidden that lovely form, O terrible Syama?*
>
> *Dance that way once for me, O Mother! Throw down Thy sword and take
> the flute; Cast off Thy garland of heads, and wear Thy wild-flower
> garland......*

As Sri Ramakrishna sang, he left his seat and began to dance. The
devotees, too, stood up. Every now and then the Master went into samadhi
and the devotees gazed at him intently. Dr. Dukari touched the Master\'s
eyeballs with his finger to test the genuineness of his samadhi. This
disgusted the devotees.

When the music and dancing were over, the devotees took their seats.
Just then Keshab arrived with some of his Brahmo disciples. Rajendra
told him about their great joy in the Master\'s kirtan and requested
Trailokya to sing again. Keshab replied, \"Since Sri Ramakrishna has
taken his seat, the kirtan will sound flat.\"

Trailokya and the Brahmo devotees sang:

> *Chant, O mind, the name of Hari,*
>
> *Sing aloud the name of Hari,*
>
> *Praise Lord Hari\'s name!*
>
> *And praising Hari\'s name, O mind,*
>
> *Cross the ocean of this world.*
>
> *Hari dwells in earth, in water,*
>
> *Hari dwells in fire and air;*
>
> *In sun and moon He dwells.*
>
> *Hari\'s ever living presence*
>
> *Fills the boundless universe.*

While preparations were being made to give the guests something to eat,
Sri Ramakrishna talked with Keshab.

MASTER (with a smile): \"Today I enjoyed very much the machine by which
a man\'s picture is taken. One thing I noticed was that the impression
doesn\'t stay on a bare piece of glass, but it remains when the glass is
stained with a black solution. In the same way, mere hearing of
spiritual talk doesn\'t leave any impression. People forget it soon
afterwards. But they can retain spiritual instruction if they are
stained inside with earnestness and devotion.\"

The Master was conducted to the second floor of the house and was asked
to sit on a beautiful carpet. The ladies waited .on him while he ate his
meal. Keshab and the other devotees were also sumptuously fed.

**Sunday, January 1, 1882**

Sri Ramakrishna arrived with his devotees at the house of Jnan
Choudhury, in Calcutta, to join the annual festival of the Simla Brahmo
Samaj. Keshab, Ram, Manomohan, Balaram, Kedar, Narendra, Rakhal, and
other devotees were present. Narendra had met the Master only a few days
before at the temple garden at Dakshineswar. He used to participate now
and then in the worship of the Simla Brahrno Samaj and sing for the
congregation.

The worship was arranged according to the usual custom of the Samaj.
First the scripture was read; then Narendra sang. It was dusk. The
devotees made merry.

**Company of holy men extolled**

The Master looked at the householder devotees seated around him and said
with a smile: \"Why shouldn\'t it be possible for a householder to give
his mind to God? But the truth is that he no longer has his mind with
him. If he had it, then he could certainly offer it to God. But, alas,
the mind has been mortgaged-mortgaged to \'woman and gold\'. So it is
necessary for him constantly to live in the company of holy men. When,
he gets back his own mind, then he can devote it to spiritual practice;
but first it is necessary to live constantly with the guru, wait on him,
and enjoy the company of spiritual people. Either he should think of God
in solitude day and night, or he should live with holy men. The mind
left to itself gradually dries up. Take a jar of water, for instance. If
the jar is set aside, the water dries up little by little. But that will
not happen if the jar is kept immersed in the Ganges.

**Concerning the ego**

\"The iron becomes red in the furnace of a smithy. Take it out and it
becomes black as before. Therefore the iron must be heated in the
furnace every now and then.

\"Do you know what ignorance means? It is the feeling: \'This is my
house; these are my relatives; I am the doer; and the household affairs
go on smoothly because I manage them.\' But to feel, \'I am the servant
of God, His devotee, His son\'-that is a good attitude.

\"The \'I\' cannot be effaced altogether. You may explain it away
through reasoning, but the next moment it reappears, nobody knows from
where. It is like a goat that still bleats faintly and jerks its legs
even after its head has been cut off.

\"But the \'I\' that God retains in His devotee after he has seen Him is
called the \'ripe I\'. It is like a sword turned into gold by touching
the philosopher\'s stone; you cannot hurt anybody with it.\"

Thus the Master talked, seated in the worship hall, and Keshab and the
other devotees listened with rapt attention. It was about eight o\'clock
in the evening. The bell rang three times for the worship. .

MASTER (to Keshab and the others): \"What\'s this? I see you haven\'t
yet begun your regular worship.\"

KESHAB: \"What further worship do we need? We are having all this.\"

MASTER: \"Oh no, my dear sir! Let the worship be performed according to
your custom.\"

KESHAB: \"Why? We are getting on very well\"

At the Master\'s repeated request Keshab began the worship. In the midst
of it Sri Ramakrishna suddenly stood up and went into samadhi. The
Brahmo devotees sang:

> *Chant, O mind, the name of Hari,*
>
> *Sing aloud the name of Hari,*
>
> *Praise Lord Hari\'s name!*
>
> *And praising Hari\'s name, O mind,*
>
> *Cross the ocean of this world. . . .*

The Master still stood there absorbed in ecstasy. Keshab led him down
very carefully from the temple to the courtyard. The music went on. The
Master danced to the music, the devotees dancing around him.

After the refreshments Sri Ramakrishna again talked with Keshab. Soon he
began to sing. Keshab sang with the Master:

> *The black bee of my mind is drawn in sheer delight*
>
> *To the blue lotus flower of Mother Syama\'s feet,*
>
> *The blue flower of the feet of Kali, Siva\'s Consort;*
>
> *Tasteless, to the bee, are the blossoms of desire.*
>
> *My Mother\'s feet are black, and black, too, is the bee;*
>
> *Black is made one with black! This much of the mystery*
>
> *My mortal eyes behold, then hastily retreat.*
>
> *But Kamalakanta\'s hopes are answered in the end;*
>
> *He swims in the Sea of Bliss, unmoved by joy or pain.*

Again they sang:

> *High in the heaven of the Mother\'s feet, my mind was soaring like a
> kite,*
>
> *When came a blast of sin\'s rough wind that drove it swiftly to ward
> the earth. . . .*

Both Keshab and the Master were in a state of divine fervour. The other
devotees joined them and sang and danced till midnight.

The Master rested a few minutes and then said to Keshab: \"Why did you
send me presents when your son was married? What shall I do with them?
Take them back.\"

Keshab smiled a little, and the Master continued: \"Why do you write
about me in your paper? You cannot make a man great by writing about him
in books and magazines. If God makes a man great, then everybody knows
about him even though he lives in a forest. When flowers bloom in the
deep woods, the bees find them, but the flies do not. What can man do?
Don\'t look up to him. Man is but a worm. The tongue that praises you
today will abuse you tomorrow. I don\'t want name and fame. May I always
remain the humblest of the humble and the lowliest of the lowly!\"

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Appendix B**

A LETTER

*(Written to M. from by Ashwini Kumar Dutta)*

**My beloved brother M.,**

Three days ago I received the fourth part of the *Sri Sri Râmakrishna
Kathāmrita* sent by you, and today I have finished reading it. You are
blessed indeed. What heavenly nectar you have sprinkled all over the
country!... A long time ago you wanted me to set down my conversations
with the Master. Now I shall try to write them for you. But I was not
born under the lucky star of an M., that I might jot down the days, the
dates, and the hours of my visits with the Master and note down
correctly all the words uttered by his holy lips. In this letter I am
giving you as many of my experiences as I remember. Very likely I shall
confuse the events of one day with another-and I have forgotten many
things.

It was probably during the autumn holidays of 1881 that I met Sri
Ramakrishna the first time. I arrived at Dakshineswar in a country boat
and, going up the steps of the landing-*ghāt,* asked someone where the
Paramahamsa was.

\"There is the Paramahamsa\", was the reply. A man was pointed out on
the north verandah, which faces the garden. He was sitting reclining
against a bolster. He wore a black-bordered cloth. At the sight of the
bolster and the black-bordered cloth I said to myself, \"What kind of
paramahamsa is this?\"

Going nearer, I found him half leaning against the bolster with his
hands clasped around his drawn-up knees. Then I thought: \"Evidently he
is not used to pillows as gentlemen are. So perhaps he is the
Paramahamsa.\" At his right, very near the pillow sat a gentleman whose
name, I came to know, was Rajendra Lal Mitra, later an Assistant
Secretary to the Government of Bengal. A little farther off sat some
others.

After a few moments the Master said to Rajendra Bābu, \"See whether
Keshab is coming.\" Evidently Keshab Sen was expected that day.

Someone walked away a few steps and, coming back, said, \"No, he
isn\'t.\"

After a brief interval, hearing a sound outside, he said, \"Please look
once more.\"

Again someone went out and came back with the same reply.

Then Sri Ramakrishna laughed and said, quoting a popular saying, \"The
leaves rustle outside, and Radha say\'s, \'Oh, here comes my
Sweetheart!\'\"

Continuing, he said: \"You see, Keshab always tantalizes me like this.
It is his way.\"

At dusk Keshab came with his party. Keshab bowed low before the Master,
touching the ground with his forehead. The Master returned his
salutation in the same manner.

Shortly afterwards Sri Ramakrishna said, in a state of partial
consciousness: \"Look! He has brought the whole

Calcutta crowd. I am supposed to deliver a lecture. I won\'t do anything
of the sort. Do it yourself if you like.

Lecturing is none of my business.\"

Still in the ecstatic mood, he said with a divine smile: \"I shall eat,
drink, and be merry. I shall play and sleep. But I can\'t give
lectures.\"

As Keshab Babu watched him, he became overpowered with divine emotion.
Every now and then he said, \"Ah me! Ah me!\"

I too watched the Master and said to myself, \"Can this be pretence?\" I
had never seen anything like it before, and you know how deep my faith
is.

Coming back from samadhi, the Master said to Keshab: \"Keshab, once I
went to your temple. In the course of your preaching I heard you say,
\'We shall dive into the river of devotion and go straight to the Ocean
of Satchidananda.\' At once I looked up \[at the gallery where Keshab\'s
wife and the other ladies were sitting\] and thought, \'Then what will
become of these ladies?\' You see, Keshab, you are householders. How can
you reach the Ocean of Satchidananda all at once? You are like a
mongoose with a brick tied to its tail. When something frightens it, it
runs up the wall and sits in a niche. But how can it stay there any
length of time? The brick pulls it down and it falls to the floor with a
thud. You may practise a little meditation, but the weight of wife and
children will pull you down. You may dive into the river of devotion,
but you must come up again. You will alternately dive and come up. How
can you dive and disappear once for all?\"

Keshab Babu said: \"Can\'t a householder ever succeed? What about
Maharshi Devendranath Tagore?\"

Twice or thrice the Master repeated softly, \"Devendranath Tagore -
Devendra-Devendra\" and bowed to him several times.

Then he said: \"Let me tell you a story. A man used to celebrate the
Durga Puja at his house with great pomp. Goats were sacrificed from
sunrise to sunset. But after a few years the sacrifice was not so
imposing. Then someone said to him, \'How is it; sir, that the sacrifice
at your place has become such a tame affair?\' \'Don\'t you see?\' he
said. \'My teeth are gone now. Devendra is now devoted to meditation and
contemplation. It is only natural that he should be, at his advanced
age. But no doubt he is a great man.

\"You see, as long as a man is under māyā\'s spell, he is like a green
coconut. When you scoop out the soft kernel from a green coconut, you
cannot help scraping a little of the shell at the same time. But in the
case of a ripe and dry coconut, the shell and kernel are separated from
each other. When you shake the fruit you can feel the kernel rattling
inside. The man who is freed from maya is like a ripe and dry coconut.
He feels the soul to be separated from the body. They are no longer
connected with each other.

\"It is the \'I\' that creates all the trouble. Won\'t this wretched ego
ever leave a person? You see a peepal-tree growing from the rubbish of a
tumble down house. You cut it down today, but tomorrow you find a new
sprout shooting up. It is the same with the ego. You may wash seven
times a cup that onions have been kept in, but the wretched smell never
leaves it.\"

In the course of the conversation he said to Keshab: \"Well, Keshab, I
understand that your Calcutta babus say that God does not exist. Is that
true? A Calcutta babu wants to climb the stairs. He takes one step, but
before taking the next he cries out: \'Oh, my side! My side!\' and drops
down unconscious. His relatives raise a hue and cry and send for a
doctor; but before the doctor arrives the man is very likely dead. And
people of such stamina say, \'There is no God\'!\"

After an hour or so the kirtan began. What I saw then I shall never
forget either in this life or in the lives to come. Everybody danced,
Keshab included. The Master was in the centre. All danced around. him in
a circle. During the dancing Sri Ramakrishna suddenly stood motionless,
transfixed in samadhi. A long time passed this way. After hearing his
words and seeing all this, I said to myself, \"Yes, a paramahamsa
indeed!\"

Another day, probably in 1883, I visited the Master with a few young men
from Srirampore. Looking at them, he asked, \"Why have they come here?\"

MYSELF: \"To see you.\"

MASTER: \"What\'s there to see in me? Why don\'t they look at the
buildings and temples?\"

MYSELF: \"Sir, they haven\'t come to see those things. They have come to
see you.\"

MASTER: \"Ah! Then they must be flints. There is fire in them. You may
keep a flint under water a thousand years, but the moment you strike it,
sparks come out. They must be of that type. But it will be useless to
try to strike fire out of me!\"

At this last remark we all laughed. I do not recall now what other
things he said to us that day. But it seems to me he told us about the
renunciation of \"woman and gold\" and the impossibility of getting rid
of the ego.

I visited him another day. When I bowed down to him and took a seat, he
said, \"Can you bring me some of that stuff-a little sour, a little
sweet-that begins to fizz when you push down the cork?\"

MYSELF: \"Lemonade?\"

MASTER: \"Why don\'t you bring a bottle for me?\"

I think I brought him a bottle. So far as I remember, I was alone with
him that day. I asked him a few questions.

MYSELF: \"Do you observe caste?\"

MASTER: \"How can I say yes? I ate curry at Keshab Sen\'s house. Let me
tell you what once happened to me. A man with a long beard brought some
ice here, but I didn\'t feel like eating it. A little later someone
brought me a piece of ice from the same man, and I ate it with great
relish. You see, caste restrictions fall away of themselves. As coconut
and palm trees grow up, the branches drop off of themselves. Caste
conventions drop off like that. But don\'t tear them off as those fools
do \[meaning the Brahmos\].\"

MYSELF: \"What do you think of Keshab Babu?\"

MASTER: \"Oh, he is a saintly man.\"

MYSELF: \"And Trailokya Babu?\"

MASTER: \"A fine man. He sings very well.\"

MYSELF: \"Shivanath Babu?\"

MASTER: \" . . . A very good man. But he argues.\"

MYSELF: \"What is the difference between a Hindu and a Brahmo?\"

MASTER: \"There is not much difference. In the serenade we have here,
one flutist plays a single note right along, while another plays various
melodies. The Brahmos play one note, as it were; they hold to the
formless aspect of God. But the Hindus bring out different melodies;
that is to say they enjoy God in His various aspects.

\"The formless Deity and God with form may be likened to water and ice.
The water freezes into ice. The ice melts into water through the heat of
jnana. Water takes the form of ice through the cooling influence of
bhakti.

\"The Reality is one. People give It various names. Take the case of a
lake with four landing-ghats on its four banks. People who draw water at
one ghat call it \'jal\', and those who draw it at the second ghat call
it \'pani\'. At the third ghat they call it \'water\', and at the
fourth, \'aqua\'. But it is one and the same thing water.\"

I told the Master that I had met Achalananda Tirthavadhuta of Barisal.

MASTER: \"Isn\'t that Ramkumar of Kotrang?\"

MYSELF\': \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"How did you like him?\"

MYSELF: \"Very much.\"

MASTER: \"Well, whom do you like better-him or me?\"

MYSELF: \"Oh, can there be any comparison between you two? He is a
scholar, an erudite person; but are you one?\"

Sri Ramakrishna was a little puzzled at my reply and became silent. A
moment later I said: \"He may be a scholar, but you are full of fun!
There is great fun in your company.\"

At this the Master laughed and said: \"Well said! Well said! Right you
are!\"

He asked me, \"Have you seen my Panchavati?\"

MYSELF: \"Yes sir.\"

He told me a little of what he had practised there-his various religious
austerities. He also told me about Nangta.

Then I asked him, \"How can I realize God?\"

MASTER: \"You see, He is constantly attracting us, as a magnet attracts
iron. But the iron cannot come to the magnet if it is covered with dirt.
When the dirt is washed away, the iron is instantly drawn to the magnet.
Weep for God and the tears will wash away the dirt from your mind.\"

As I was writing down his words, he remarked: \"Look here. Only
repeating the word \'siddhi\' will not produce intoxication. You must
actually get some hemp, rub it in water, and then drink the solution. .
. .\"

Later he said: \"Since you are going to lead a householder\'s life,
create a roseate intoxication in your mind with the thought of God. You
will be doing your duties, but let that pleasant intoxication remain
with you. You cannot, of course, like Sukadeva, be so inebriated with
the thought of God that you will lie naked and unconscious. As long as
you have to live in the world, give God the power of attorney. Make over
all your responsibilities to Him; let Him do as He likes. Live in the
world like a maidservant in a rich man\'s house. She bathes her
master\'s children, washes them, feeds them, and takes affectionate care
of them in many ways, as if they were her own children; but in her heart
she knows very well that they do not belong to her. No sooner is she
dismissed than all is over; she has no more relationship with the
children.

\"Before breaking open the jack-fruit you should rub your hands with oil
in order to protect them from the sticky juice. Likewise, protect
yourself with the oil of devotion; then the world will not cling to you
and you will not be affected by it.\"

All this time Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the floor. Now he got up and
stretched himself on his cot.

He said to me, \"Fan me a little.\"

I began to fan him and he was silent.

After a while he said: \"Oh, it\'s so hot! Why don\'t you dip the fan in
water?\"

\"Ah!\" I said. \"You have your fancies, too!\"

The Master smiled and drawled out, \"And-why-not?\"

\"Very well!\" I said. \"Have your full measure of them.\"

I cannot express in words how immensely I enjoyed his company that day.

The last time I visited him-you have mentioned it in the third part of
your book- I had with me the headmaster of our school, who had just then
graduated. You met him the other day. As soon as Sri Ramakrishna saw
him, he asked me: \"Where did you pick him up? He\'s a fine fellow!\"

Then he continued: \"You are a lawyer. You are very clever. Can you give
me a little of your cleverness? The other day your father came here and
stayed three days.\"

MYSELF: \"How did you find him?\"

MASTER: \"A nice man. But now and then he talks nonsense.\"

MYSELF: \"Please help him get over it when you see him next.\"

At this Sri Ramakrishna smiled a little.

MYSELF: \"Please give us a few instructions.\"

MASTER:, \"Do you know Hriday?\"

MYSELF: \"Your nephew? I know him only by name.\"

MASTER: \"Hriday used to say to me: \'Uncle, please don\'t give out your
stock of instructions all at once. Why should you repeat the same things
over and over again?\' I would reply: \'You fool, what\'s that to you?
These are my words and if I like I shall repeat them a hundred thousand
times. You keep quiet!\'\"

MYSELF (smiling): \"Exactly so!\"

A little later he sat up on the bed. He repeated \"Om\" several times
and began to sing a song whose first line is:

Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God\'s Beauty.

Hardly had he sung one or two lines when he himself dived deep and was
lost in samadhi.

When the samadhi was over, he began to pace the room and with both hands
pulled up the cloth he was wearing, till it reached his waist. One end
of it was trailing on the floor and the other was hanging loose.

Nudging my companion, I whispered, \"See how nicely he wears his
cloth!\"

A moment later he threw away the cloth, with the words: \"Ugh! What a
nuisance! Off with it!\"

He began to pace up and down the room naked. From the northern end of
the room he brought an umbrella and a stick, and asked us, \"Are these
yours?\"

Scarcely had I replied no when he said: \"I knew it. I can judge a man
by his stick and umbrella. They must belong to that man who was here
some time ago and swallowed a lot of my words without understanding
them.\"

A few minutes later he sat down, still naked, on the northern end of his
cot, facing the west, and asked me, \"Well, do you consider me
ungentlemanly?\"

MYSELF: \"Of course not. You are a perfect gentleman. But why do you ask
me that?\"

MASTER: \"You see, Shivanath and others don\'t think I am a gentleman.
When they come I have to wrap a cloth or something around me. Do you
know Girish Ghosh?\"

MYSELF: \"Which Girish Ghosh? The one who is in the theatre?\"

MASTER: \"Yes.\"

MYSELF: \"I have never seen him. But I know him by reputation.\"

MASTER: \"A good man.\"

MYSELF: \"They say he drinks.\"

MASTER: \"Let him! Let him! How long will he continue that? Do you know
Narendra?\"

MYSELF: \"No, sir.\"

MASTER: \"I wish very much that you could meet him. He has passed the B.
A. examination and is unmarried.\"

MYSELF: \"Very well, sir. I shall meet him.\"

MASTER: \"Today there will be a kirtan at Ram Dutta\'s house. You may
meet him there. Please go there this evening.\"

MYSELF: \"All right.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, do. Don\'t forget.\"

MYSELF: \"It is your command. Shall I not obey it? Surely I will go.\"

He showed us the pictures in his room and asked me whether a picture of
Buddha could be had.

MYSELF: \"Very likely.\"

MASTER : \"Please get one for me.\"

MYSELF: \"Very well. I\'ll bring one when I come again.\"

But alas, I never returned to Dakshineswar.

That evening I went to Ram Babu\'s house and met Narendra. In one of the
rooms the Master sat reclining against a pillow. Narendra sat at his
right, and I in front.

He asked Narendra to talk with me. But Narendra said: \"I have a bad
headache today. I don\'t feel like talking.\"

I replied, \"Then let us put it off till another day.\"

And that came to pass in May or June of 1897, at Almora. The will of the
Master had to be fulfilled, and it was fulfilled after twelve years. Ah,
how happily I spent those few days with Swami Vivekananda at Almora!
Sometimes at his house, sometimes at mine, and one day on the top of a
hill with nobody accompanying us. I never met him after that. It was as
if to fulfil the Master\'s wish that we saw each other at Almora.

I saw the Master not more than four or five times; but in that short
time we became so intimate that I felt as if we had been class-mates.
How much liberty I took while speaking with him! But no sooner had I
left his

presence than it flashed on me: \"Goodness gracious! Think where I have
been!\" What I saw and received in those few days has sweetened my whole
life. That Elysian smile of his, laden with nectar, I have locked up in
the secret closet of my memory. That is the unending treasure of a
hapless person like myself. A thrill of joy passes through my heart when
I think how a grain of the bliss shed from that laughter has been
sweetening the lives of millions, even in distant America. If that be my
case, you may very well understand how lucky you are.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         | > **Chronology**  |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         | > A CHRONOLOGY OF |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > SRI             |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > RAMAKRISHNA\'S  |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > LIFE            |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > *     |                   |     | > |     |     |   |        |   |
| *Year** |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | * |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | * |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | E |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | v |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | e |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | n |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | t |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | ( |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | s |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | ) |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | * |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | * |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1775  | > Birth of        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Khudirām.       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1791  | > Birth of        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Chandrā Devi.   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1805  | > Birth of        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Rāmkumār.       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1814  | > Khudirām        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > settles at      |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Kāmārpukur.     |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1826  | > Birth of        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Rāmeswar.       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1835  | > Khudirām\'s     |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > pilgrimage to   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Gayā.           |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1836  | > Birth of Sri    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Rāmakrishna,    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > February 18,    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > about 5:15 a.m. |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1843  | > Death of        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Khudirām.       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1845  | > Sri             |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Rāmakrishna\'s  |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > *Sacred Thread  |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Ceremony.*      |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1850  | > Rāmkumar opens  |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > his school in   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Calcutta.       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1852  | > Sri Rāmakrishna |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > comes to        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Calcutta.       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1853  | > Birth of Holy   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Mother, Sri     |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Sāradā Devi,    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > December 22.    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         | > Dakhineśwar     | >   | > |     | >   | a | D      |   |
|         | > Kāli            | Tem |   |     | Hri | t | akshin |   |
|         |                   | ple | f |     | day |   | eśwar. |   |
|         |                   |     | o |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | u |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | n |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | d |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | e |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | d |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | . |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1855  | > Sri Ramakrishna |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > appointed       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Priest of the   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Vishnu Temple   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > and then, of    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         | > the Kāli        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Temple.         |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1856  | > Death of        |     |   | >   |     | f |        |   |
|         | > Rāmkumār.       |     |   |  of |     | i |        |   |
|         | > Realization     |     |   | >   |     | r |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   | God |     | s |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   | >   |     | t |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   | and |     | G |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | o |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | d |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | - |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | i |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | n |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | t |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | o |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | x |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | i |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | c |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | a |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | t |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | e |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     | d |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         | > state of Sri    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Rāmakrishna.    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1857  | > Sri             |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Rāmakrishna\'s  |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > treatment under |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Gangā Prasād.   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1858  | > Haladhāri as    | >   |   |     | >   |   |        | t |
|         | > Priest          |  at |   |     | Sri |   |        | o |
|         |                   | > D |   |     | >   |   |        |   |
|         |                   | aks |   |     |  Rā |   |        |   |
|         |                   | hin |   |     | mak |   |        |   |
|         |                   | esw |   |     | ris |   |        |   |
|         |                   | ar. |   |     | hna |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     | > g |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     | oes |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         | > Kāmārpukur.     |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1859  | > Sri             |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Rāmakrishna\'s  |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > marriage.       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1860  | > Return to       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Dakshineśwar.   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Mathur\'s       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > vision.         |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1861  | > Death of Rāni   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Rāsmani.        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Meeting with    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > the Brāhmani.   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > *Tantra*        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > practice        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         | > under the       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Brāhmani.       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Second divine   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > madness.        |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1863  | > Completion of   |     |   | > M |     |   | Padmal |   |
|         | > *Tantra*        |     |   | eet |     |   | ochan. |   |
|         | > practice.       |     |   | ing |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   | > w |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   | ith |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   | >   |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   | Pun |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   | dit |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         | > Chandrā Devi    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > comes to live   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > at              |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Dakshineśwar.   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         | > Sri             |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Rāmakrishna\'s  |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > practice of the |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > *Vātsalya       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Bhāva* under    |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         | > Jatādhāri.      |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
| > 1864  | > Practice of the |     | > |     |     | i | > *Sa  | b |
|         | > *Madhur*        |     |   |     |     | n | nnyās* | y |
|         |                   |     | * |     |     | t |        |   |
|         |                   |     | B |     |     | o |        |   |
|         |                   |     | h |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | ā |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | v |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | a |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | . |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | * |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | > |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | I |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | n |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | i |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | t |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | i |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | a |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | t |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | i |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | o |     |     |   |        |   |
|         |                   |     | n |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         | > Totāpuri.       |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+
|         |                   |     |   |     |     |   |        |   |
+---------+-------------------+-----+---+-----+-----+---+--------+---+

+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1865    | > Akshay replaces Haladhāri.        |                     |
|         | > Totāpuri leaves Dakshineśwar.     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1866    | > Sri Rāmakrishna in the *Advaita*  | for six months.     |
|         | > plane                             | Illness.            |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         | > Practise of *Mohammadanism.*      |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1867    | > Sri Rāmakrishna at Kāmārpukur.    |                     |
|         | > Brāhmani takes leave.             |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1868    | > Pilgrimage. Meeting with Ganga    |                     |
|         | > Mā.                               |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1870    | > Tour with Mathur. Sri Rāmakrishna | Colootola           |
|         | > at the                            | Harisabha. Visit    |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         | > to Kālna and Navadvip.            |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1871    | > Death of Mathur.                  |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1872    | > The Holy Mother\'s first visit to |                     |
|         | > Dakshineśwar. The *Shodashi       |                     |
|         | > Puja.*                            |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1873    | > Death of Rāmeswar.                |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1874    | > The Holy Mother again at          |                     |
|         | > Dakshineśwar.                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1875    | > Sri Rāmakrishna\'s first visit to |                     |
|         | > Keshab Chandra Sen                |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1876    | > Death of Chandrā Devi.            |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1878    | > Intimacy with Keshab. The Holy    |                     |
|         | > Mother\'s third visit to          |                     |
|         | > Dakshineśwar.                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1879    | > Coming of disciples begins.       |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1880    | > Last visit to Kāmārpukur.         |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1881    | > Dismissal of Hriday. Meeting with |                     |
|         | > Rākhāl and Narendranāth.          |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1882    | > Visit to Pundit Vidyāsāgar. The   |                     |
|         | > Holy Mother again at              |                     |
|         | > Dakshineswar.                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1884    | > Death of Keshab. Meeting with     |                     |
|         | > Pundit Shashadhar, Gopal Mā. Holy |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         | > Mother comes to live at           |                     |
|         | > Dakshineśwar for the last time.   |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1885    | > Last visit to Panihati. Illness   |                     |
|         | > and shifted to Śyāmpukur.         |                     |
|         | > Association                       |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         | > with Dr. Sarkār. Shifted to       |                     |
|         | > Cossipore.                        |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
| 1886    | > Treatment at Cossipore.           |                     |
|         | > Organization of disciples.        |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         | > *Mahā-samādhi,* August 16, at two |                     |
|         | > minutes past 1 a.m.               |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         |                                     |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
|         | > \-\-                              |                     |
|         | \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-- |                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------+---------------------+
