**Saturday, December 22, 1883**

Rākhāl , Harish, M., and Lātu had been staying with Sri Ramakrishna at
Dakshineswar. About nine o\'clock in the morning the Master was sitting
with them on the southeast verandah of his room, when Balarām\'s father
and Devendra Ghosh of Syampukur arrived.

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, how does one obtain love for God?\"

MASTER: \"Go forward. The king dwells beyond the seven gates. You can
see him only after passing through all the gates.

\"At the time of the installation of Annapurna at Chanak, I said to
Dwarika Babu: \'Large fish live in the deep water of a big lake. Throw
some spiced bait into the water; then the fish will come, attracted by
its smell; now and then they will make the water splash. Devotion and
ecstatic love are like the spiced bait.

**Divine Incarnations**

\"God sports in the world as man. He incarnates Himself as man-as in the
case of Krishna, Rāma, and Chaitanya. Once I said to Keshab: \'The
greatest manifestation of God is in man. There are small holes in the
balk of a field, where crabs and fish accumulate in the rainy season. If
you want to find them you must seek them in the holes. If you seek God,
you must seek Him in the Incarnations.\'

\"The Divine Mother of the Universe manifests Herself through this
three-and-a-half cubit man. There is a song that says:

> *O Mother, what a machine is this that Thou hast made!*
>
> *What pranks Thou playest with this toy*
>
> *Three and a half cubits high!*
>
> \"One needs spiritual practice in order to know God and recognize
> Divine Incarnations. Big fish live in

the large lake, but to see them one must throw spiced bait in the water.
There is butter in milk, but one must churn the milk to get it. There is
oil in mustard-seed, but one must press the seed to extract the oil.\"

DEVOTEE: \"Has God form, or is He formless?\"

MASTER:\"Wait, wait! First of all you must go to Calcutta; then only
will you know where the Maidan, the Asiatic Society, and the Bengal Bank
are located. If you want to go to the brahmin quarter of Khardaha, you
must first of all go to Khardaha.

\"Why should it not be possible to practice the discipline of the
formless God? But it is very difficult to follow that path. One cannot
follow it without renouncing \'woman and gold\'. There must be complete
renunciation, both inner and outer. You cannot succeed in this path if
you have the slightest trace of worldliness.

\"It is easy to worship God with form. But it is not easy as all that.

\"One should not discuss the discipline of the Impersonal God or Through
great effort perhaps he is just cultivating a little devotion.
everything as a mere dream.

the path of knowledge with a bhakta. You will injure it if you explain
away

\"Kabir was a worshipper of the Impersonal God. He did not believe in
Śiva, Kāli, or Krishna. He used to make fun of them and say that Kāli
lived on the offerings of rice and banana, and that Krishna danced like
a monkey when the gopis clapped their hands. (*All laugh*).

\"One who worships God without form perhaps sees at first the deity with
ten arms, then the deity with four arms, then the Baby Krishna with two
arms. At last he sees the Indivissible Light and merges in It.

\"It is said that sages like Dattatreya and Jadabharata did not return
to the relative plane after having the visition of Brahman. According to
some people Sukadeva tasted only a drop of that Ocean of
Brahman-Consciousness. He saw and heard the rumbling of the waves of
that Ocean, but did not dive into It.

\"A brahmachari once said to me, \'One who goes beyond Kedār cannot keep
his body alive.\' Likewise, a man cannot preserve his body after
attaining Brahmajnana.1 The body drops off in twenty-one days.

\"There was an infinite field beyond a high wall. Four friends tried to
find out what was beyond the wall. Three of them, one after the other,
climbed the wall, saw the field, burst into loud laughter, and dropped
to the other side. These three could not give any information about the
field. Only the fourth man came back and told people about it. He is
like those who retain their bodies, even after attaining Brahmajnana, in
order to teach others. Divine Incarnations belong to this class.

\"Parvati was born as the daughter of King Himalaya. After Her birth She
revealed to the king Her various divine forms. The father said: \'Well,
Daughter, You have shown me all these forms. That is nice. But You have
another aspect, which is Brahman. Please show me that.\' \'Father,\'
replied Parvati, \'if you seek the Knowledge of Brahman, then renounce
the world and live in the company of holy men.\' But King Himalaya
insisted. Thereupon Parvati revealed Her Brahman-form, and immediately
the king fell down unconscious.

\"All that I have just said belongs to the realm of reasoning. Brahman
alone is real and the world illusory-that is reasoning. And everything
but Brahman is like a dream. But this is an extremely difficult path. To
one who follows it even the divine play in the world becomes like a
dream and appears unreal; his \'I\' also vanishes. The followers of this
path do not accept the Divine Incarnation. It is a very difficult path.
The lovers of God should not hear much of such reasoning.

\"That is why God incarnates Himself as man and teaches people the path
of devotion. He exhorts people to cultivate self-surrender to God.
Following the path of devotion, one realizes everything through His
grace both Knowledge and Supreme Wisdom.

\"God sports in this world. He is under the control of His devotee.
\'Syama, the Divine Mother, is Herself tied by the cord of the love of
Her devotee.\'

\"Sometimes God becomes the magnet and the devotee the needle, and
sometimes the devotee becomes the magnet and God the needle. The devotee
attracts God to him. God is the Beloved of His devotee and is under his
control.

\"According to one school, the gopis of Vrindāvan, like Yaśoda, had
believed in the formless God in their previous births; but they did not
derive any satisfaction from this belief. That is why later on they
enjoyed so much bliss in the company of Sri Krishna in the Vrindāvan
episode of His life. One day Krishna said to the gopis: \'Come along. I
shall show you the Abode of the Eternal. Let us go to the Jamuna for a
bath.\' As they dived into the water of the river, they at once saw
Goloka. Next they saw the Indivisible Light. Thereupon Yaśoda exclaimed:
\'O Krishna, we don\'t care for these things any more. We would like to
see You in Your human form. I want to take You in my arms and feed
You.\'

**God and His devotee**

\"So the greatest manifestation of God is through His Incarnations. The
devotee should worship and serve an Incarnation of God as long as He
lives in a human body. \'At the break of day He disappears into the
secret chamber of His House.\'

**God manifesting Himself as living beings**

\"Not all, by any means, can recognize an Incarnation of God. Assuming a
human body, the Incarnation falls victim to disease, grief, hunger,
thirst, and all such things, like ordinary mortals. Rāma wept for Sita.
\'Brahman weeps, entrapped in the snare of the five elements.\'

\"It is said in the Purana that God, in His Incarnation as the Sow,
lived happily with His young ones even after the destruction of
Hiranyāksha. As the Sow, He nursed them and forgot all about His abode
in heaven. At last Śiva killed the sow body with his trident, and God,
laughing aloud, went to His own abode.\"

In the afternoon Bhavanath arrived. Rākhāl , M., Harish, and other
devotees were in the room.

MASTER (*to Bhavanath*): \"To love an Incarnation of God- that is
enough. Ah, what ecstatic love the gopis had for Krishna!\"

Sri Ramakrishna began to sing, asuming the attitude of the gopis:

> *O Krishna! You are the Soul of my soul\...*

Then he sang:

> *I am not going home, O friend,*
>
> *For there it is hard for me to chant my Krishna\'s name*\...

And again:

> *O Friend, that day I stood at my door as You were going to the
> woods\...*

Continuing, the Master said:\"When Krishna suddenly disappeared in the
act of dancing and playing with gopis, they were beside themselves with
grief. Looking at tree, they said: \'O tree, you must be a great hermit.
You must have seen Krishna. Otherwise, why do you stand there
motionless, as if absorbed in samādhi?\' Looking at the earth covered
with green grass, they said\" \'O earth, you must have seen Kirshna.
Otherwise, why does your hair stand on end? you must have enjoyed the
thrill of His touch.\' Looking at the madhavi creeper, they said, \'O
madhavi, give us back our Madhava!\' The gopis were intoxicated with
ecstatic love for Krishna. Akrura came to Vrindāvan to take Krishna and
Balarama to Mathura. When they mounted the chariot, the gopis clung to
the wheels. They would not let the chariot move.\"

Saying this, Sri Ramkrisna sang, assuming the attitude of Akrura:

> *Hold not, hold not the chariot\'s wheels!*
>
> *Is it the wheels that make it move?*
>
> *The Mover of its wheels is Krishna,*
>
> *By whose will the worlds are moved\....*

MASTER: \" *\'Is it the wheels that make it move?\' \'By whose will the
worlds are moved.\'* \'The driver moves the

chariot at His Master\'s bidding.\' I feel deeply touched by these
lines.\"

**Sunday, December 23, 1883**

At nine o\'clock in the morning Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the
southwest porch of his room, with Rākhāl , Lātu, M., Harish, and some
other devotees. M. had now been nine days with the Master at
Dakshineswar. Earlier in the morning Manomohan had arrived from Konnagar
on this way to Calcutta. Hazra, too, was present.

A Vaishnava was singging. Referring to one of the songs, Sri Ramakrishna
said: \"I didn\'t enjoy that song very much. The songs of the earlier
writers seem to me to have more of the right spirit. Once I sang for
Nangta

at the Panchavati: *\'To arms! To arms, O man! Death storms your house
in battle array.\'* I sang another: *\'O*

*Mother, I have no one else to blame: Alas! I sink in the well these
very hands have dug.\'*

\"Nangta, the Vedantist, was a man of profound knowledge. understand its
meaning. Padmalochan also wept when I Mother. And he was truly a great
pundit.\"

The song moved him to tears though he didn\'t sang the songs of
Ramprasad about the Divine

After the midday meal Sri Ramakrishna rested a few minutes in his room.
M. was sitting on the floor. The Master was delighted to hear the music
that was being played in the nahabat. He then explained to M. that
Brahman alone has become the universe and all living beings.

MASTER: \"Referring to a certain place, someone once said to me:
\'Nobody sings the name of God there. It has no holy atmosphere.\' No
sooner did he say this than I perceived that it was God alone who had
become all living beings. They appeared as countless bubbles, or
reflections in the Ocean of Satchidananda.

\"Again, I find sometimes that living beings are like so many pills made
of Indivisible Consciousness. Once I was on my way to Burdwan from
Kamarpukur. At one place I ran to the meadow to see how living beings
are sustained. I saw ants crawling there. It appeared to me that every
place was filled with Consciousness.\"

Hazra entered the room and sat on the floor.

MASTER: \"Again, I perceive that living beings are like different
flowers with various layers of petals. They are also revealed to me as
bubbles, some big, some small.\"

**Master\'s childlike mood**

While describing in this way the vision of different divine forms, the
Master went into an ecstatic state and said, \"I have become! I am
here!\" Uttering these words he went into samādhi. His body was
motionless. He remained in that state a long time and then gradually
regained partial consciousness of the world. He began to laugh like a
boy and pace the room. His eyes radiated bliss as if he had seen a
wondrous vision. His gaze was not fixed on any particular object, and
his face beamed with joy. Still pacing the room, the Master said: \"I
saw the paramahamsa who stayed under the banyan tree walking thus with
just such a smile. Am I too in that state of mind?\"

He sat on the small couch and engaged in conversation with the Divine
Mother.

MASTER: \"I don\'t even care to know. Mother, may I have pure love for
Thy Lotus Feet!

(To M.) \"One attains this state immediately after freeing oneself of
all grief and desire.

(To the Divine Mother) \"Mother, Thou hast done away with my worship.
Please see, Mother, that I don\'t give up all desire. Mother, the
paramahamsa is but a child. Doesn\'t a child need a mother? Therefore
Thou art the Mother and I am the child. How can the child live without
the Mother?\"

Sri Ramakrishna was talking to the Divine Mother in a voice that would
have melted even a stone. Again he addressed Her, saying: \"mere
knowledge of Advaita! I spit on it! Thou doest exist as long as Thou
dost keep the ego in me. The paramahamsa is but a child. Doesn\'t a
child need a mother?\"

M. sat there speechless and looked at the divine manifestation in the
Master. He said to himself: \"The Master is an ocean of mercy that knows
no motive. He has kept himself in the state of a paramahamsa that he
might, as teacher, awaken the spiritual consciousness of myself and
other earnest souls.\"

1.  further thought: \"The Master says,
    \'Advaita-Chaitanya-Nitayananda\'; that is to say, through the
    knowledge of the Non-dual Brahman one attains Consciousness and
    enjoys Eternal Bliss. The master has not only attained the knowledge
    of non-duality but is in a state of Eternal Blisss. He is always
    drunk with ecstatic love for the Mother of the Universe.\"

With folded hands Hazara looked at the Master and said every now and
they:\"How blessed you are! How blessed you are!\"

MASTER (*to Hazra*): \"But you have hardly any faith; you simply live
here to add to the play, like Jatila and Kutila.\"

In the afternoon M. paced the temple garden alone. He was deeply
absorbed in the thought of the Master and was pondering the Master\'s
words concerning the attainment of the exalted state of the paramahamsa,
after the elimination of grief and desire. M. said to himself: \"Who is
this Sri Ramakrishna, acting as my teacher? Has God embodied Himself for
our welfare? The master himself says that none but an Incarnation can
come down to the phenomenal plane from the state of nirvikalpa
samādhi.\"

**Monday, December 24, 1883**

At eight o\'clock in the morning Sri Ramakrishna and M. were talking
together in the pine-grove at the northern end of the temple garden.
This was the eleventh day of M.\'s stay with the Master.

It was winter. The sun had just risen. The river was flowing north with
the tide. Not far off could be seen the bel-tree where the Master had
practised great spiritual austerities. Sri Ramakrishna faced the east as
he talked to his disciple and told him about the Knowledge of Brahman.

MASTER: \"The formless God is real, and equally real is God with form.
Nangta used to instruct me about the nature of Satchidananda Brahman. He
would say that It is like an infinite ocean- water everywhere, to the
right, left, above, and below. Water enveloped in water. It is the Water
of the Great Cause, motionless. Waves spring up when It becomes active.
Its activities are creation, preservation and destruction.

\"Again, he ued to say that Brahman is where reason comes to stop. There
is the instance of camphor.

> Nothing remains after it is burnt-not even a trace of ash.

\"Brahman is beyond mind and speech. A salt doll entered the ocean to
measure its depth; but it did not return to tell others how deep the
ocean was. It melted in the ocean itself.

\"The rishis once said to Rāma: \'O Rāma, sages like Bharadvaja may very
well call you an Incarnation of God, but we cannot do that. We adore the
Word-Brahman. 3 We do not want the human form of God.\' Rāma smiled and
went away, pleased with their adoration.

**Different manifestations of the Absolute**

\"But the Nitya and the Lila are the two aspects of the same Reality. As
I have said before, it is like the roof

and the steps leading to it. The Absolute plays in many ways: as Isvara,
as the gods, as man, and as the universe. The Incarnation is the play of
the Absolute as man. Do you know how the Absolute plays as man? It is
like the rushing down of water from a big roof through a pipe; the power
of Satchidananda-nay, Satchidananda Itself-descends through the conduit
of a human form as water descends through the pipe. Only twelve sages,
Bharadvaja and the others, recognized Rāma as an Incarnation of God. Not
everyone can recognize an Incarnation.

\"It is God alone who incarnates Himself as man to teach people the ways
of love and knowledge. Well, what do you think of me?

\"Once my father went to Gaya. There Raghuvir said to him in a dream,
\'I shall be born as your son.\' Thereupon my father said to Him: \'O
Lord, I am a poor brahmin. How shall I be able to serve You?\' \'Don\'t
worry about it\', Raghuvir replied. \'It will be taken care of.\'

\"My sister, Hriday\'s mother, used to worship my feet with flowers and
sandal-paste. One day I placed my foot on her head and said to her,
\'You will die in Benares.\'

\"Once Mathur Babu said to me: \'Father, there is nothing inside you but
God. Your body is like an empty shell. It may look from outside like a
pumpkin, but inside there is nothing-neither flesh nor seed. Once I saw
you as someone moving with a veil on.\'

**Master\'s vision of Gaurānga**

(To M.) \"I am shown everything beforehand. Once I saw Gaurānga and his
devotees singing kirtan in the Panchavati. I think I saw Balarām there
and you too.

\"I wanted to know the experiences of Gaurānga and was shown them at
Syambazar in our native district. A crowd gathered; they even climbed
the trees and the walls; they stayed with me day and night. For seven
days I had no privacy whatever. Thereupon I said to the Divine Mother,
\'Mother, I have had enough of it.\'

\"I am at peace now. I shall have to be born once more. Therefore I am
not giving all knowledge to my companions. (With a smile) Suppose I give
you all knowledge; will you then come to me again so willingly?

\"I recognized you on hearing you read the Chaitanya Bhagavat. You are
my own. The same substance, like father and son. All of you are coming
here again. When you pull one part of the kalmi creeper, all the
branches come toward you. You are all relatives-like brothers. Suppose
Rākhāl , Harish, and the others had gone to Puri, and you were there
too. Would you live separately?

**Parable of the grass-eating tiger**

\"Before you came here, you didn\'t know who you were. Now you will
know. It is God who, as the guru, makes one know.

\"Nangta told the story of the tigress and the herd of goats. Once a
tigress attacked a herd of goats. A hunter saw her from a distance and
killed her. The tigress was pregnant and gave birth to a cub as she
expired. The cub began to grow in the company of the goats. At first it
was nursed by the she-goats, and later on, as it grew bigger, it began
to eat grass and bleat like the goats. Gradually the cub became a big
tiger; but still it ate grass and bleated. When atached by other
animals, it would run away, like the goats. One day a fierce-looking
tiger attacked the herd. It was amazed to see a tiger in the herd eating
grass and running away with the goats at its approach. It lef the goats
and caught hold of the grass-eating tiger, which began to bleat and
tried to run away. But the fierce tiger dragged it to the water and
said: \'Now look at your face in the water. You see, you have the
pot-face of a tiger; it is exactly like mine.\' Next it pressed a piece
of meat into its mouth. At first the grass-eating tiger refused to eat
the meat. Then it got the taste of the meat and relished it. At last the
fierce tiger said to the grass-eater: \'What a disgrace! You lived with
goats and ate grass like them!\' And the other was really ashamed of
itself.

\"Eating grass is like enjoying \'woman and gold\'. To bleat and run
away like a goat is to behave like an ordinary man. Going away with the
new tiger is like taking shelter with the guru, who awakens one\'s
spiritual consciousness, and recognizing him alone as one\'s relative.
To see one\'s face rightly is to know one\'s real Self.\"

Sri Ramakrishna stood up. There was silence all around, distrubed only
the by the gentle rustling of the pine-needless and the murmuring of the
Ganges. The Master went to the Panchavati and then to his room, talking
all the while with M. The disciple followed him, fascinated. At the
Panchavati Sri Ramakrishan touched with his forehead the raised platform
around the banyan-tree. This was the place of his intense spiritual
discipline, where he had wept bitterly for the vision of the Divine
Mother, where he had held intimate communion with Her, and where he had
seen many divine forms.

The maser and M. passed the cluster of bakul-tress and came to the
nahabat. Hazara awas there. The master said to him:\" Don\'t eat too
much, and give up this craze for outer cleanliness. People with a craze
do not attain Knowledge. Follow conventions only as much as necessary.
Don\'t go to excess.\" The Master entered his room and sat on the couch.

Sri Ramakrishna was resting after his midday meal when Surendra, Ram,
and other devotees arrived from Calcutta. It was about one o\'clock.
While M. was strolling alone under the pine-tress, Harish came there and
told him that the Master wanted him in his room. Someone was going to
read from the *\'Śiva Samhita*, a book containing instructions about
yoga and six centres.

M. entered the room and saluted the Master. The devotees were seated on
the floor, but no one was reading the book. Sri Ramakrishna was talking
to the devotees.

MASTER:\"The gopis cherished escstatic love for Krishna. There are two
elements in such love: \'I-ness\' and \'my-ness\'. \'I-ness\' is the
feeling that Krishna will be ill if \'I\' do not serve Him. In this
attitude the devotee does not look upon his Ideal as God.

\"\'My-ness\' is to feel that the Beloved is \'my\' own. The gopis had
such a feeling of \'my-ness\' toward Krishna that they would place their
subtle bodies under His feet lest His soles should get hurt.

\"Yaśoda remarked: \'I don\'t understand your Chintamani Krishna. To me
He is simply Gopala.\' The gopis also said: \'Oh, where is Krishna, our
Beloved? Where is Krishna, our Sweetheart?\' They were not conscious of
His being God.

\"It is like a small child saying \'my daddy\'. If someone says to the
child, \'No, he is not your daddy\', the child says, \'Yes, he is my
daddy.\'

**God, incarnated as man, acts like a man**

\"God, incarnating Himself as man, behave exactly like a man. That is
why it is difficult to recognize an Incarnation. When God becomes man,
He is exactly like man. He has the same hunger, thirst, disease, grief,
and sometimes even fear. Rāma was stricken with grief for Sita. Krishna
carried on His head the shoes and wooden stool of His father Nanda.

\"In the theatre, when an actor comes on the stage in the role of a holy
man, he behaves like one, and not like the actor who is taking the part
of the king. He plays his own role.

\"Once an impersonator dressed himself as a world-renouncing monk.
Pleased with the correctness of his disguise, some rich people offered
him a rupee. He did not accept the money but went away shaking his head.
Afterwards he removed his disguise and appeared in his usual dress. Then
he said to the rich people, \'Please give me the rupee.\' They replied:
\'Why, you went away refusing our present. Why do you ask for it now?\'
The man said: \'But then I was in the role of a holy man. I could not
accept money.\' Likewise, when God becomes man He behaves exactly like a
man.

\"At Vrindāvan one sees many places associated with Krishna\'s life.\"

SURENDRA: \"We were there during the holidays. Visitors were continually
pestered for money. The priests and others asked for it continually. We
told them that we were going to leave for Calcutta the next day, but we
fled from Vrindāvan that very night.\"

MASTER: \"What is that? Shame! You said you would leave the place the
next day and ran away that very day. What a shame!\"

SURENDRA (embarrassed): \"Here and there we saw the babajis in the woods
practising spiritual discipline in solitude.\"

MASTER: \"Did you give them anything?\"

SURENDRA: \"No, sir.\"

MASTER: \"That was not proper of you. One should give something to monks
and devotees. Those who have the means should help such persons when
they meet them.

**Master\'s reminiscences of Mathura and Vrindāvan**

\"I went to Vrindāvan with Mathur Babu. The moment I came to the Dhruva
Ghat at Mathura, in a flash I saw Vasudeva crossing the Jamuna with
Krishna in his arms.

\"One evening I was taking a stroll on the beach of the river. There
were small thatched huts on the beach and big plum-trees. It was the
\'cow-dust\' hour. The cows were returning from the pasture, raising
dust with their hoofs. I saw them fording the river. Then came some
cowherd boys crossing the river with their cows. No sooner did I behold
this scene than I cried out, \'O Krishna, whre are You?\' and becam
unconscious.

\"I wanted to visit Syamakunda and Radhakunda; so Mathur Babu sent me
there in a palanquin. We had a long way to go. Food was put in the
palanquin. While going over the meadow I was overpowerd with emotion and
wept:\'O Krishna, I find everything the same; only You are not here.
This is the very meadow where You tended the cows.\' Hriday followed me
on foot. I was bathed in tears. I couldn\'t ask the bearers to stop the
palanquin.

\"At Syamakunda and Radhakunda I saw the holy men living in small mud
huts.

lest their eyes should fall on men, they were engaged in spiritual
discipline.

Grove\'.

Facing away from the road One should visit the \'Twelve

\"I went in to samdhi at the sight of the image of Bankuvihari. In that
state I wanted to touch it. I did not want to visit Govindaji twice. At
Mathura I dreamt of Krishna as the cowherd boy. Hriday dnd Mathur Babu
had the same dream.

(To Surendra) \"You have both- yoga and bhoga. There are different
classes of sages: the brahmarshi, the devarshi, and the rajarshi.
Sukadeva is an example of the brahmarshi. He didn\'t keep even one book
with him. An example of the devarhi is Nārada. Janaka was a rajarshi,
devoted to selfless work.

\"The devotee of the Divine Mother attains dharma and moksha. He enjoys
artha and kama as well. Once I saw you in a vision as the child of the
Divine Mother. You have both- yoga and bhoga; otherwise your countenance
would look dry.

\"The man who renounces all looks dry. Once I saw a devotee of the
Divine Mother at the bathing-ghat on the Ganges. He was eating his meal
and at the same time worhipping the Mother. He looked on himself as the
Mother\'s child.

\"But it isn\'t good to have much money. I find that Jadu Mallick is
drowned in worldliness. It is because he has too much money. Nabin
Niyogi, too, has both yoga and bhoga. I saw him and his son waving the
fan before the image of the Divine Mother at the time of the Durga
Puja.\"

SURENDRA:\"Sir, why can\'t I meditate?\"

MASTER:\"You remember God and think of Him, don\'t you?\"

SURENDRA:\"Yes, sir. I go to sleep repeating the word \'Mother\'.\"

MASTER:\"That is very good. It will be enough if you remember God and
think of Him.\"

Sri Ramakrishna had taken Surendra\'s responsibilities on himself. Why
should Surendra worry about anything?

It was evening. The Master was sitting on the floor of this room with
the devotees. He was talking to them about yoga and the six centes.
These are described in the *Śiva Samhita*.

MASTER:\"Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna are the three principal nerves. All
the lotuses are located in the Sushumna. They are formed of
Consciousness, like a tree made of wax-the branches, twigs, fruits, and
so forth all of wax. The Kundalini lies in the lotus of the Muladhara.
That lotus has four petals. The Primordial Energy resides in all bodies
as the Kundalini. She is like a sleeping snake coiled up-\'of the form
of a sleeping snake, having the Muladhara for Her abode\'. (To M.) The
Kundalini is speedily awakened if one follows the path of bhakti. God
cannot be seen unless She is awakened. Sing earnestly and secretly in
solitude:

> *Waken, O Mother! O Kundalini, whose nature is Bliss Eternal! Thou art
> the serpent coiled in sleep, in the lotus of the Muladhara.*

\"Ramprasad achieved perfection through singing. One obtains the vision
of God if one sings with yearning heart.\"

M: \"Grief and distress of mind disappear if one has these experiences
but once.\"

**Proper time for spiritual unfoldment**

MASTER: \"That is true. Distress of mind disappears for ever. I shall
tell you a few things about yoga. But you see, the mother bird doesn\'t
break the shell until the chick inside the egg is matured. The egg is
hatched in the fullness of time. It is necessary to practise some
spiritual discipline. The guru no doubt does everything for the
disciple; but at the end he makes the disciple work a little himself.
When cutting down a big tree, a man cuts almost through the trunk; then
he stands aside for a moment, and the tree falls down with a crash.

\"The farmer brings water to his field through a canal from the river.
He stands aside when only a little digging remains to be done to connect
the field with the water. Then the earth becomes soaked and falls of
itself, and the water of the river pours into the canal in torrents.

\"A man is able to see God as soon as he gets rid of ego and other
limitations. He sees God as soon as he is free from such feelings as \'I
am a scholar\', \'I am the son of such and such a person\', \'I am
wealthy\', \'I am honourable\', and so forth.

1.  \'God alone is real and all else unreal; the world is
    illusory\'-that is discrimination. One cannot assimilate spiritual
    instruction without discrimination.

\"Through the practice of spiritual discipline one attains perfection,
by the grace of God. But one must also labour a little. Then one sees
God and enjoys bliss. If a man hears that a jar filled with gold is
buried at a certain place, he rushes there and begins to dig. He sweats
as he goes on digging. After much digging he feels the spade strike
something. Then he throws away the spade and looks for the jar. At the
sight of the

jar he dances for joy. Then he takes up the jar and pours out the gold
coins. He takes them into his hand, counts them, and feels the ecstasy
of joy. Vision-touch- enjoyment. Isn\'t it so?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

The Master was silent a moment and then went on.

MASTER: \"Those who are my own will come here even if I scold them. Look
at Narendra\'s nature! At first he used to abuse my Mother Kāli very
much. One day I said to him sharply, \'Rascal! Don\'t come here any
more.\'

He slowly left the room and prepared a smoke. He who is one\'s own will
not be angry even if scolded. What do you say?\"

M: \"That is true, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Narendra is perfect from his very birth. He is devoted to the
ideal of the formless God.\"

M. (*smiling*): \"Whenever he comes here he brings along great
excitement.\"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled and said, \"Yes, excitement indeed.\"

The following day was Tuesday, the ekadasi day of the lunar fortnight.
and the Master had not yet taken his meal. M., Rākhāl , and other room.

It was eleven o\'clock in the morning devotees were sitting in the
Master\'s

MASTER (to M.): \"One should fast on the eleventh day of the lunar
fortnight. That purifies the mind and helps one to develop love of God.
Isn\'t that so?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"But you may take milk and puffed rice. Don\'t you think so?\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 18**

M. AT DAKSHINESWAR (II)

> December 26, 1883

SRI RAMAKRISHNA, accompanied by Manilal Mallick, M., and several other
devotees, was in a carriage on his way to Ram\'s new garden.

The garden, which Ram had recently purchased, was next to Surendra\'s.

Incarnation of God. He visited Sri Ramakrishna frequently at
Dakshineswar.

the Brahmo Samaj. The Brahmos do not believe in Divine Incarnations.

Ram adored the Master as an Manilal Mallick was a member of

MASTER (to Manilal): \"In order to meditate on God, one should try at
first to think of Him as free from upadhis, limitations. God is beyond
upadhis. He is beyond speech and mind. But it is very difficult to
achieve perfection in this form of meditation.

\"But it is easy to meditate on an Incarnation-God born as man. Yes, God
in man. The body is a mere covering. It is like a lantern with a light
burning inside, or like a glass case in which one sees precious
things.\"

Arriving at the garden, the Master got out of the carriage and
accompanied Ram and the other devotees to the sacred tulsi-grove.
Standing near it, he said: \"How nice! It is a fine place. You can
easily meditate on God here.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sat down in the house, which stood to the south of the
lake. Ram offered him a plate of fruit and sweets which he enjoyed with
the devotees. After a short time he went around the garden.

Next Sri Ramakrishna proceeded toward Surendra\'s garden. He walked on
foot a little distance and saw a sādhu sitting on a couch under a tree.
At once he went up to the holy man and joyfully began a conversation
with him.

MASTER: \"To which order of monks do you belong? Have you any
title-Giri, Puri, or the like?\"

SĀDHU: \"People call me a paramahamsa.\"

**Brahman and Śakti identical**

MASTER: \"That is good. \'I am Śiva\'-that is a good attitude. But I
must tell you something else. The process of creation, preservation, and
destruction that is going on day and night is due to Śakti, the Power of
God. This Primal Power and Brahman are one and the same. Śakti cannot
exist without Brahman, just as waves cannot exist without water. There
cannot be any instrumental music without an instrument.

\"As long as God keeps us in His relative world, so long we feel that
there are two. If one accepts Śakti, one accepts Brahman as well. If one
is aware of night, one is also aware of day. If one is aware of
knowledge, one is also aware of ignorance.

\"But there is another state in which God reveals to His devotee that
Brahman is beyond both knowledge and ignorance. It cannot be described
in words. What exists, exists.\"

After a pleasant conversation with the sādhu, the Master returned to the
carriage, the holy man walking with him. Sri Ramakrishna looked upon him
as a friend of long acquaintance, and they walked arm in arm.

The Master arrived at Surendra\'s garden. The very first thing he talked
about was the sādhu.

MASTER: \"He is a very nice man. (To Ram) Bring him to Dakshineswar when
you come. He is really a good

man. There is a line in a song to the effect that a man cannot recognize
a holy person unless he is holy himself.

**Many forms of divine manifestation**

\"The sādhu believes in God without form. That is good. God is both
formless and endowed with form. He is many things more. The Absolute and
the Relative belong to one and the same Reality. What is beyond speech
and mind is born in the flesh, assuming various forms and engaging in
various activities. From that one Om have sprung \'Om Śiva\', \'Om
Kāli\', and \'Om Krishna\'. Suppose the master of a house has sent out a
small boy of the family to invite people to a feast. All look on the boy
with great fondness and affection because he is the son or grandson of a
prominent man.\"

The Master took refreshments at Surendra\'s garden house and then set
out for Dakshineswar with the devotees.

**Thursday, December 27, 1883**

The temple garden was filled with the sweet music of the dawn service;
which mingled with the morning melody from the nahabat. Leaving his bed,
Sri Ramakrishna chanted the names of God in sweet tones. Then he bowed
before the pictures of the different deities in his room and went to the
west porch to salute the Ganges.

Some of the devotees who had spent the night at the temple garden came
to the Master\'s room and bowed before him. Rākhāl was staying with the
Master, and Baburam had come the previous evening. M. had been staying
there two weeks.

Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: \"I have been invited to Ishan\'s this
morning. Baburam will accompany me, and you too.\" M. made ready to go
with the Master.

At eight o\'clock the carriage hired for the Master stood waiting in
front of the nahabat. On all sides plants and trees were in flower, and
the river sparkled in the sunlight of the bright winter\'s day. The
Master bowed once more before the pictures. Then, still chanting the
name of the Divine Mother, he got into the carriage, followed by M. and
Baburam. The devotees took with them Sri Ramakrishna\'s woolen shawl,
woolen cap, and small bag of spices.

Sri Ramakrishna was very happy during the trip and enjoyed it like a
child. About nine o\'clock the carriage stopped at the door of Ishan\'s
house.

Ishan and his relatives greeted the Master and led him to the parlour on
the first floor. Shrish, Ishan\'s son, was introduced to Sri
Ramakrishna. The young man practised law at Alipur. He had been a
brilliant student, having stood first in two of the university
examinations, but he was extremely modest.

MASTER (to Shrish): \"What is your profession?\"

SHRISH: \"I am practising law at Alipur.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"For such a man to be a lawyer! (To Shrish) Well, have
you any questions to ask? Perhaps you want to know how to live
unattached in the world. Isn\'t that so?\"

SHRISH: \"Under the pressure of duties people do many unrighteous things
in the world. Further, some are engaged in good work, and some in evil.
Is this due to their actions in previous births? Is that why they act
this way?\"

**Duties and ceremonial devotions**

MASTER: \"How long should a man perform his duties? As long as he has
not attained God. Duties drop away after the realization of God. Then
one goes beyond good and evil. The flower drops off as soon as the fruit

appears. The flower serves the purpose of begetting the fruit.

\"How long should a devotee perform daily devotions such as the sandhya?
As long as his hair does not stand on end and his eyes do not shed tears
at the name of God. These things indicate that the devotee has realized
God. From these one knows that he has attained pure love of God.
Realizing God one goes beyond virtue and vice.

> *I bow my head, says Prasad, before desire and liberation; Knowing the
> secret that Kāli is one with the highest Brahman, I have discarded,
> once for all, both righteousness and sin.*

\"The more you advance toward God, the less He will give you worldly
duties to perform.\"

SHRISH: \"It is extremely difficult to proceed toward God while leading
the life of a householder.\"

**Practice of God-communion**

MASTER: \"Why so? What about the yoga of practice? At Kamarpukur I have
seen the women of the carpenter families selling flattened rice. Let me
tell you how alert they are while doing their business. The pestle of
the husking-machine that flattens the paddy constantly falls into the
hole of the mortar. The woman turns the paddy in the hole with one hand
and with the other holds her baby on her lap as she nurses it. In the
mean time customers arrive. The machine goes on pounding the paddy, and
she carries on her bargains with the customers\'. She says to them,
\'Pay the few pennies you owe me before you take anything more.\' You
see, she has all these things to do at the same time-nurse the baby,
turn the paddy as the pestle pounds it, take the flattened rice out of
the hole, and talk to the buyers. This is called the yoga of practice.
Fifteen parts of her mind out of sixteen are fixed on the pestle of the
husking-machine, lest it should pound her hand. With only one part of
her mind she nurses the baby and talks to the buyers. Likewise, he who
leads the life of a householder should devote fifteen parts of his mind
to God; otherwise he will face ruin and fall into the clutches of Death.
He should perform the duties of the world with only one part of his
mind.

\"A man may lead the life of a householder after attaining Knowledge.
But he must attain Knowledge first. If the milk of the mind is kept in
the water of the world, they get mixed. Therefore he should turn the
milk into curd and extract butter from it by churning it in solitude;
then he may keep the butter in the water of the world. Therefore, you
see, spiritual discipline is necessary. When the Aśwattha tree is a mere
sapling, it must be enclosed by a fence; otherwise the cattle will eat
it. But the fence may be taken away when the trunk grows thick and
strong. Then even an elephant tied to the tree cannot harm it.

**Necessity of spiritual discipline**

\"Therefore at the beginning the aspirant should go into solitude now
and then. Spiritual discipline is necessary. You want to eat rice;
suppose you sit down somewhere and say, \'Wood contains fire and fire
cooks rice.\' Can saying it cook the rice? You must get two pieces of
wood and by rubbing them together bring out the fire.

\"By eating siddhi one becomes intoxicated and feels happy. But suppose
you haven\'t eaten the stuff or done anything else with it; you simply
sit down somewhere and mutter, \'Siddhi! siddhi!\' Will that intoxicate
you or make you happy?

\"You may learn a great deal from books; but it is all futile if you
have no love for God and no desire to realize Him. A mere pundit,
without discrimination and renunciation, has his attention fixed on
\'woman and gold\'. The vulture soars very high but its eyes are fixed
on the charnel-pit.

\"That alone is knowledge through which one is able to know God. All
else is futile. Well, what is your idea about God?\"

SHRISH: \"Sir, I feel that there is an All-knowing Person. We get an
indication of His Knowledge by looking at

His creation. Let me give an illustration. God has made devices to keep
fish and other aquatic animals alive in cold regions. As water grows
colder, it gradually shrinks. But the amazing thing is that, just before
turning into ice, the water becomes light and expands. In the freezing
cold, fish can easily live in the water of a lake: the surface of the
lake may be frozen, but the water below is all liquid. If a very cool
breeze blows, it is obstructed by the ice. The water below remains
warm.\"

MASTER: \"That God exists may be known by looking at the universe. But
it is one thing to hear of God, another thing to see God, and still
another thing to talk to God. Some have heard of milk, some have seen
it, and some, again, have tasted it. You feel happy when you see milk;
you are nourished and strengthened when you drink it. You will get peace
of mind only when you have seen God. You will enjoy bliss and gain
strength only when you have talked to Him.\"

SHRISH: \"We do not have time to pray to God.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"That is true. Nothing comes to pass except at
the right time. Going to bed, a child said to his mother, \'Mother,
please wake me up when I feel the call of nature.\' \'My son,\' said the
mother, \'that urge itself will wake you up. I don\'t have to wake
you.\'

\"It is all decided beforehand by God what each one shall receive. A
mother-in-law used to measure rice with a dish for her daughters-in-law.
But it was not enough for them. One day the dish was broken and that
made the girls happy. But the mother-in-law said to them, \'Children,
you may shout and dance, but I can measure the rice with the palm of my
hand.\'

**Self-surrender to God**

(To Shrish): \"Surrender everything at the feet of God. What else can
you do? Give Him the power of attorney. Let Him do whatever He thinks
best. If you rely on a great man, he will never injure you.

**Illustration of monkey and kitten**

\"It is no doubt necessary to practise spiritual discipline; but there
are two kinds of aspirants. The nature of the one kind is like that of
the young monkey, and the nature of the other kind is like that of the
kitten. The young monkey, with great exertion, somehow clings to its
mother. Likewise, there are some aspirants who think that in order to
realize God they must repeat His name a certain number of times,
meditate on Him for a certain period, and practise a certain amount of
austerity. An aspirant of this kind makes his own efforts to catch hold
of God. But the kitten, of itself, cannot cling to its mother. It lies
on the ground and cries, \'Mew, mew!\' It leaves everything to its
mother. The mother cat sometimes puts it on a bed, sometimes on the roof
behind a pile of wood. She carries the kitten in her mouth hither and
thither. The kitten doesn\'t know how to cling to the mother. Likewise,
there are some aspirants who cannot practise spiritual discipline by
calculating about japa or the period of meditation. All that they do is
cry to God with yearning hearts. God hears their cry and cannot keep
Himself away. He reveals Himself to them.\"

At noon the host wished to feed the Master and the devotees. Sri
Ramakrishna was smilingly pacing the room. Now and then he exchanged a
few words with the musician.

MUSICIAN: \"It is God alone who is both the \'instrument\' and the
\'cause\'. Duryodhana said to Krishna: \'O Lord, Thou art seated in my
heart. I act as Thou makest me act.\'\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Yes, that is true. It is God alone who acts
through us. He is the Doer, undoubtedly, and man is His instrument. But
it is also true that an action cannot fail to produce its result. Your
stomach will certainly burn if you eat hot chilli. It is God who has
ordained that chilli will burn your stomach. If you commit a sin, you
must bear its fruit. But one who has attained perfection, realized God,
cannot commit sin. An expert singer cannot sing a false note. A man with
a trained voice sings the notes correctly: sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha,
ni.\"

The meal was ready. The Master and the devotees went to the inner court,
where they were treated to a

generous feast.

About. three o\'clock in the afternoon the Master was seated again in
Ishan\'s drawing-room with M. and Shrish. He resumed his conversation
with Shrish.

MASTER: \"What is your attitude toward God? \'I am He\', or \'Master and
servant\'? For the householder it is very good to look on God as the
Master. The householder is conscious of doing the duties of life
himself. Under such conditions how can he say, \'I am He\'? To him who
says, \'I am He\' the world appears to be a dream. His mind, his body,
even his ego, are dreams to him. Therefore he cannot perform worldly
duties. So it is very good for the householder to look on himself as the
servant and on God as the Master.

\"Hanuman had the attitude of a servant. He said to Rāma: \'O Rāma,
sometimes I meditate on You as the whole and on myself as the part.
Sometimes I feel that You are the Master and I am the servant. But when
I have the Knowledge of Reality, I see that I am You and You are I.\'

\"In the state of Perfect Knowledge one may feel, \'I am He\'; but that
is far beyond the ordinary man\'s experience.\"

SHRISH: \"That is true, sir. The attitude of a servant relieves a man of
all his worries. The servant depends entirely upon his master. A dog is
devoted to its master. It depends upon him and is at peace.\"

**God with form and the formless Deity**

MASTER: \"Well, what suits your taste-God with form or the formless
Reality? But to tell you the truth, He who is formless is also endowed
with form. To His bhaktas He reveals Himself as having a form. It is
like a great ocean, an infinite expanse of water, without any trace of
shore. Here and there some of the water has been frozen. Intense cold
has turned it into ice. Just so, under the cooling influence, so to
speak, of the bhakta\'s love, the Infinite appears to take a form.
Again, the ice melts when the sun rises; it becomes water as before.
Just so, one who follows the path of knowledge -the path of
discrimination-does not see the form of God any more. To him everything
is formless. The ice melts into formless water with the rise of the Sun
of Knowledge. But mark this: form and formlessness belong to one and the
same Reality.\"

At dusk the Master was ready to start for Dakshineswar. He stood on the
south porch of the drawing-room, talking to Ishan. Someone remarked that
the chanting of God\'s holy name did not always produce results. Ishan
said: \"How can you say that? The seeds of an Aśwattha tree are no doubt
tiny, but in them lie the germs of big trees. It may take a very long
time for them to grow.\"

\"Yes, Yes!\" said the Master. \"It takes a long time to see the
effect.\"

Next to Ishan\'s was his father-in-law\'s house. Sri Ramakrishna stood
at the door of this house, ready to get into the carriage. Ishan and his
friends stood around to bid him adieu. Sri Ramakrishna said to Ishan:
\"You are living in the world as a mudfish lives in the mud. It lives in
the mud but its body is not stained.

\"There are both vidyā and avidyā in this world of maya. Who may be
called a paramahamsa? He who, like a swan, can take the milk from a
mixture of milk and water, leaving aside the water. He who, like an ant,
can take the sugar from a mixture of sugar and sand, leaving aside the
sand.\"

It was evening. The Master stopped at Ram\'s house on his way to
Dakshineswar. He was taken to the drawing-room and there he engaged in
conversation with Mahendra Goswami. Mahendra belonged to the Vaishnava
sect and was Ram\'s neighbour. Sri Ramakrishna was fond of him.

MASTER: \"The worshippers of Vishnu and the worshippers of Śakti will
all ultimately reach one and the same goal; the ways may be different.
The true Vaishnavas do not criticize the Saktas.\"

GOSWAMI (smiling): \"Śiva and Parvati are our Father and Mother.\" Sri
Ramakrishna, out of his stock of a

dozen English words, said sweetly, \"Thank you!\" Then he added, \"Yes,
Father and Mother!\"

GOSWAMI: \"Besides, it is a sin to criticize anyone, especially a
devotee of God. All sins may be forgiven, but not the sin of criticizing
a devotee.\"

MASTER: \"But this idea of sin does not by any means affect all. For
instance, the Isvarakotis, such as Incarnations of God, are above sin.
Sri Chaitanya is an example.

\"A child, walking on a narrow ridge and holding to his father, may slip
into the ditch. But that can never happens if the father holds the child
by the hand.

**The Master\'s prayer for pure love**

\"Listen. I prayed to the Divine Mother for pure love. I said to Her:
\'Here is Thy righteousness, here is Thy unrighteousness. Take them both
and give me pure love for Thee. Here is Thy purity, here is Thy
impurity. Take them both and give me pure love for Thee. O Mother, here
is Thy virtue, here is Thy vice. Take them both and give me pure love
for Thee.\' \"

GOSWAMI: \"Yes, sir. That is right.\"

**Unswerving devotion to God**

MASTER: \"You should undoubtedly bow before all views. But there is a
thing called unswerving devotion to one ideal. True, you should salute
everyone. But you must love one ideal with your whole soul. That is
unswerving devotion.

\"Hanuman could not take delight in any other form than that of Rāma.
The gopis had such single-minded love for the cowherd Krishna of
Vrindāvan that they did not care to see the turbaned Krishna of Dwaraka.

\"A wife may serve her husband\'s brothers by fetching water, or in
other ways, but she cannot serve them in the way she does her husband.
With him she has a special relationship.\"

Ram treated the Master to sweets. Sri Ramakrishna was ready to start for
Dakshineswar. He put on his woolen shawl and cap, and got into the
carriage with M. and the other devotees. Ram and his friends saluted the
Master.

**Saturday, December 29, 1883**

It was the day of the new moon, auspicious for the worship of the Divine
Mother. At one o\'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna got into a
carriage to visit the temple of Kāli at Kalighat. He intended to stop at
Adhar\'s house on the way, since Adhar was to accompany him to the
temple. While the carriage was waiting near the north porch of the
Master\'s room, M. went to the Master and said, \"Sir, may I also go
with you?\"

MASTER: \"Why?\"

M: \"I should like to visit my home in Calcutta.\"

Sri Ramakrishna reflected a moment and said: \"Must you go home? Why?
You are quite all right here.\"

M. wanted to see his people a few hours, but evidently the Master did
not approve.

**Sunday, December 30, 1883**

At three o\'clock in the afternoon, while M. was walking up and down
under a tree, a devotee came to him and said that the Master had sent
for him. M. went to Sri Ramakrishna\'s room and found a number of
devotees there. He saluted the Master.

Ram, Kedār, and others had arrived from Calcutta. Ram had brought with
him the Vedantist monk whom the Master had visited near his garden a few
days earlier. On that occasion Sri Ramakrishna had asked him to

bring the sādhu to Dakshineswar.

The monk was sitting on the small couch with the Master. They were
talking happily in Hindusthani.

MASTER: \"What do you feel about all this?\"

MONK: \"It is all like a dream.\"

MASTER: \"Brahman alone is real and the world illusory. Well sir, what
is Brahman?\"

MONK: \"Brahman is the Sound. It is Om.\"

MASTER: \"But there must be something indicated by the sound. Isn\'t
that so?\"

MONK: \"That Itself is the thing indicated as well as the indicator.\"

At these words Sri Ramakrishna went into samādhi and sat motionless. The
monk and the devotees looked wonderingly at him in his ecstatic
condition. Kedār said to the monk: \"Look at him, sir. This is
samādhi.\"

The monk had read of samādhi but had never seen it before. After a few
minutes the Master began gradually to come down to the normal plane of
consciousness. He said to the Divine Mother: \"Mother, I want to be
normal. Please don\'t make me unconscious. I should like to talk to the
sādhu about Satchidananda. Mother, I want to be merry talking about
Satchidananda.\"

The monk was amazed to see the Master\'s condition and to hear these
words. Sri Ramakrishna said to him:

\"Please do away with your \'I am He\'. Let us now keep \'I\' and
\'Thou\' to enjoy the fun.\"

A little later the Master was walking in the Panchavati with Ram, Kedār,
M., and the other devotees.

MASTER (to Kedār, with a smile): \"What did you think of the sādhu?\"

KEDĀR: \"It is all dry knowledge. The pot has just been put on the fire,
but as yet there is no rice in it.\"

MASTER: \"That may be true. But he has renounced everything. He who has
renounced the world has already made great progress. The sādhu belongs
to the stage of the beginner. Nothing can be achieved without the
realization of God. When a man is intoxicated with ecstatic love of God,
he dosn\'t take delight in anything else. Then-

> *Cherish my precious Mother Syama*
>
> *Tenderly within, O mind;*
>
> *May you and I alone behold Her,*
>
> *Letting no one else intrude.\"*

Kedār repeated the words of a song in keeping with the Master\'s
feeling:

> *How shall I open my heart, O friend?*
>
> *It is forbidden me to speak.*
>
> *I am about to die, for lack of a kindred soul*
>
> *To understand my misery. . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room. About four o\'clock the door of
the Kāli temple was opened, and the Master walked to the temple with the
monk; M. accompanied them. Entering the inner chamber, the Master
prostrate himself reverently before the image. The monk, with folded
hands, also bowed his head repeatedly before Kāli.

MASTER: \"What do you think of Kāli?\"

MONK (with devotion): \"Kāli is supreme.\"

MASTER: \"Kāli and Brahman are identical. Is that not so?\"

MONK: \"As long as one\'s mind is turned to the outer world, one must
accept Kāli. As long as a man sees the outer world, and discriminates
between good and evil, he must accept good and reject evil. To be sure,
all names and forms are illusory; but as long as the mind sees the outer
world, the aspirant must give up woman. The ideas of good and evil are
applied to one who is still a student on the path; otherwise he will
stray from the path of righteousness.

Thus conversing, the Master and the monk returned from the temple.

MASTER (to M.): \"Did you notice that the sādhu bowed before Kāli?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

**Monday, December 31, 1883**

At four o\'clock in the afternoon the Master was sitting in his room
with M., Rākhāl , Lātu, Harish, and other devotees.

Addressing M. and Balarām, the Master said: \"Haladhāri followed the
path of knowledge. Day and night he used to study the Upanishads, the
Adhyātma Rāmāyana, and similar books on Vedānta. He would turn up his
nose at the mention of the forms of God. Once I ate from the leaf-plates
of the beggars. At this Haladhāri said to me, \'How will you be able to
marry your children?\' I said: \'You rascal! Shall I ever have children?
May your mouth that repeats words from the Gitā and the Vedānta be
blighted!\' Just fancy! He declared that the world was illusory and,
again, would meditate in the temple of Vishnu with turned-up nose.\"

In the evening Balarām and the other devotees returned to Calcutta. The
Master remained in his room, absorbed in contemplation of the Divine
Mother: After a while the sweet music of the evening worship in the
temples was heard.

A little later the Master began to talk to the Mother in a tender voice
that touched the heart of M., who was seated on the floor. After
repeating, \"Hari Om! Hari Om! Om!\", the Master said: \"Mother, don\'t
make me unconscious with the Knowledge of Brahman. Mother, I don\'t want
Brahmajnana. I want to be merry. I want to play.\" Again he said:
\"Mother, I don\'t know the Vedānta; and Mother, I don\'t even care to
know. The Vedas and the Vedānta remain so far below when Thou art
realized, O Divine Mother!\" Then he said: \"O Krishna, I shall say to
Thee, \'Eat, my Child! Take this, my Child!\' O Krishna, I shall say to
Thee, \'My Child, Thou hast assumed this body for my sake.\' \"

**Wednesday, January 2, 1884**

Rākhāl , Lātu, Harish, Ramlal, and M. had been staying with Sri
Ramakrishna at the temple garden. About three o\'clock in the afternoon
M. found the Master on the west porch of his room engaged in
conversation with a Tantrik devotee. The Tantrik was wearing an ochre
cloth. Sri Ramakrishna asked M. to sit by his side. Perhaps the Master
intended to instruct him through his talk with the Tantrik devotee.
Mahima Chakravarty had sent the latter to the Master.

MASTER (to the Tantrik): \"It is a part of the Tantrik discipline to
drink wine from a human skull. This wine is called \'karana\'. Isn\'t
that so?\"

TANTRIK: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"But I cannot touch wine at all.\"

TANTRlK: \"You have spontaneous Divine Bliss. One who enjoys that Bliss
wants nothing else.\"

MASTER: \"I don\'t care for japa and austerity. But I have constant
remembrance and consciousness of God.

\"Tell me, when they speak of the six centres, what do they mean?\"

TAN\'TRIK: \"These are like different holy places. In each of the
centres dwell Śiva and Śakti. One cannot see them with the physical
eyes. One cannot take them out by cutting open the body.\"

M. listened silently to the conversation. Looking at him, the Master
asked the Tantrik devotee, \"Can a man attain perfection without the
help of a vija mantra, a sacred word from the guru?\"

TANTRIK: \"Yes, he can if he has faith-faith in the words of the guru.\"

The Master turned to M. and said, drawing his attention, \"Faith!\"

After the Tantrik devotee had taken his leave, Jaygopal Sen, a member of
the Brahmo Samaj, arrived. The Master talked with him.

MASTER (to Jaygopal): \"One should not harbour malice toward any person
or any opinion. The believers in the formless God and the worshippers of
God with form are all, without exception, going toward God alone. The
Jnāni, the yogi, the bhakta-all, without exception, are seeking Him
alone. The follower of the path of knowledge calls Him \'Brahman\'. The
yogi calls Him \'Ātman\' or \'Paramatman\'. The bhakta calls Him
\'Bhagavan\'. Further, it is said that there is the Eternal Lord and His
Eternal Servant.\"

JAYGOPAL: \"How can we know that all paths are true?\"

MASTER: \"A man can reach God if he follows one path rjghtly. Then he
can learn about all the other paths. It is like reaching the roof by
some means or other. Then one is able to climb down by the wooden or
stone stairs, by a bamboo pole, or even by a rope.

\"A devotee can know everything when God\'s grace descends on him. If
you but realize Him, you will be able to know all about Him. You should
somehow meet the master of a house and become acquainted with him; then
he himself will tell you how many houses he owns and all about his
gardens and government seurities.\"

**How to receive God\'s grace**

JAYGOPAL: \"How does one receive the grace of God?\"

MASTER: \"Constantly you have to chant the name and glories of God and
give up worldly thoughts as much as you can. With the greatest effort
you may try to bring water into your field for your crops, but it may
all leak out through holes in the ridges. Then all your efforts to bring
the water by digging a canal will be futile.

\"You will feel restless for God when your heart becomes pure and your
mind free from attachment to the things of the world. Then alone will
your prayer reach God. A telegraph wire cannot carry messages if it has
a break or some other defect.

\"I used to cry for God all alone, with a longing heart. I used to weep,
\'O God, where art Thou?\' Weeping thus, I would lose all consciousness
of the world. My mind would merge in the Mahāvāyu.

**Renunciation of worldly attachment**

\"How can one attain yoga? By completely renouncing attachment to
worldly things. The mind must be pure and without blemish, like the
telegraph wire that has no defect.

**Unselfish love of God**

\"One must not cherish any desire whatever. The devotion of a man who
has any desire is selfish. But desireless devotion is love for its own
sake. You may love me or not, but I love you: this is love for its own

sake.

\"The thing is that one must love God. Through intense love one attains
the vision of Him. The attraction of the husband for the chaste wife,
the attraction of the child for its mother, the attraction of worldly
possessions for the worldly man-when a man can blend these three into
one, and direct it all to God, then he gets the vision of God.\"

Jaygopal was a man of the world. Was this why the Master gave
instruction suited to him?

At eight o\'clock that evening the Master was sitting in his room with
Rākhāl and M. It was the twenty-first day of M.\'s stay with Sri
Ramakrishna. The Master had forbidden him to indulge in reasoning.

**Futility of reasoning**

MASTER (to Rākhāl ): \"It is not good to reason too much. First comes
God, and then the world. Realize God first; then you will know all about
His world. (To M. and Rākhāl ) If first one is introduced to Jadu
Mallick, then one can know everything about him-the number of his
houses, gardens, government securities, and so on. For this reason the
rishi Nārada advised Valmiki1 to repeat the word \'mara\'. \'Ma\' means
God, and \'ra\' the world. First comes God, and then the world.
Krishnakishore said that the word \'mara\' is a holy mantra because it
was given to Valmiki by the rishi. \'Ma\' means God, and \'rā\' the
world.

\"Therefore, like Valmiki, one should at first renounce everything and
cry to God in solitude with a longing heart. The first thing necessary
is the vision of God; then comes reasoning-about the scriptures and the
world.

(To M.) \"That is why I have been telling you not to reason any more. I
came from the pine-grove to say that to you. Through too much reasoning
your spiritual life will be injured; you will at last become like Hazra.
I used to roam at night in the streets, all alone, and cry to the Divine
Mother, \'O Mother, blight with Thy thunderbolt my desire to reason!\'
Tell me that you won\'t reason any more.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. I won\'t reason any more.\"

MASTER: \"Everything can be achieved through bhakti alone. Those who
want the Knowledge of Brahman will certainly achieve that also by
following the trail of bhakti.

\"Can a man blessed with the grace of God ever lack Knowledge? At
Kamarpukur I have seen grain-dealers measuring paddy. As one heap is
measured away another heap is pushed forward to be measured. The Mother
supplies the devotees with the \'heap\' of Knowledge. .

\"After attaining God, one looks on a pundit as mere straw and dust.
Padmalochan said to me: \'What does it matter if I accompany you to a
meeting at the house of a fisherman?2 With you I can dine even at the
house of a pariah.\'

\"Everything can be realized simply through love of God. If one is able
to love God, one does not lack anything. Kartika and Ganesa were seated
near Bhagavati, who had a necklace of gems around Her neck. The Divine
Mother said to them, \'I will present this necklace to him who is the
first to go around the universe.\' Thereupon Kartika, without losing a
moment, set out on the peacock, his carrier. Ganesa, on the other hand,
in a leisurely fashion went around the Divine Mother and prostrated
himself before Her. He knew that She contained within Herself the entire
universe. The Divine Mother was pleased with him and put the necklace
around his neck. After a long while Kartika returned and found his
brother seated there with the necklace on.

**The Master\'s visions**

\"Weeping, I prayed to the Mother: \'O Mother, reveal to me what is
contained in the Vedas and the Vedānta.

Reveal to me what is in the Purana and the Tantra.\' One by one She has
revealed all these to me.

\"Yes, She has taught me everything. Oh, how many things she has shown
me! One day She showed me Śiva and Śakti everywhere. Everywhere I saw
the comunion of Śiva and Śakti. Śiva and Śakti existing in all living
things-men, animals, trees, plants. I saw them in the communion of all
male and female elements.

\"Another day I was shown heaps of human heads, mountain high. Nothing
else existed, and I was seated alone in their midst.

\"Still another day She showed me an ocean. Taking the form of a salt
doll, I was going to measure its depth. While doing this, through the
grace of the guru I was turned to stone. Then I saw a ship and at once
got into it.

The helmsman was the guru. I hope you pray every day to Satchidananda,
who is the Guru. Do you?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"The guru was the helmsman in that boat. I saw that \'I\' and
\'you\' were two different things. Again I jumped into the ocean, and
was changed into a fish. I found myself swimming joyfully in the Ocean
of Satchidananda.

\"These are all deep mysteries. What can you understand through
reasoning? You will realize everything when God Himself teaches you.
Then you will not lack any knowledge.\"

**Friday, January 4, 1884**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room. M. was still staying with the
Master, devoting his time to the practice of spiritual discipline. He
had been spending a great part of each day in prayer and meditation
under the bel-tree, where the Master had performed great austerities and
had seen many wonderful visions of God.

**Master exhorts M. not to reason & Different attitudes toward God**

MASTER (to M.): \"Don\'t reason any more. In the end, reasoning only
injures the aspirant. One should assume a particular attitude toward God
while praying to Him-the attitude of friend or servant or son or
\'hero\'.

\"I assume the attitude of a child. To me every woman is my mother. The
divine Maya, seeing this attitude in an aspirant, moves away from his
path out of sheer shame.

\"The attitude of \'hero\' is extremely difficult. The Saktas and the
Bauls among the Vaishnavas follow it, but it is very hard to keep one\'s
spiritual life pure in that attitude. One can assume other attitudes
toward God as well the attitude in which the devotee serenely
contemplates God as the Creator, the attitude of service to Him, the
attitude of friendship, the attitude of motherly affection, or the
attitude of conjugal love. The conjugal relationship, the attitude of a
woman to her husband or sweetheart, contains all the rest-serenity,
service, friendship, and motherly affection. (To M.) Which one of these
appeals to your mind?\"

M: \"I like them all.\"

MASTER: \"When one attains perfection one takes delight in all these
relationships. In that state a devotee has not the slightest trace of
lust. The holy books of the Vaishnavas speak of Chandidas and the
washerwoman. Their love was entirely free from lust.

\"In that state a devotee looks on himself as a woman. He does not
regard himself as a man. Sanatana Goswami refused to see Mirabai because
she was a woman. Mira informed him that at Vrindāvan the only man was
Krishna and that all others were His handmaids. \'Was it right of
Sanatana to think of himself as a man?\' Mira inquired.\"

**Master and the Brahmo Samaj**

At dusk M. was sitting at the Master\'s feet. Sri Ramakrishna had been
told that Keshab\'s illness had taken a turn for the worse. He was
talking about Keshab and incidentally about the Brahmo Samaj.

MASTER (to M.): \"Do they only give lectures in the Brahmo Samaj? Or do
they also meditate? I understand that they call their service in the
temple \'upasana\'.

\"Keshab at one time thought a great deal of Christianity and the
Christian views. At that time, and even before, he belonged to
Devendranath Tagore\'s organization.\"

1.  \"Had Keshab Babu come here from the very beginning, he would not
    have been so preoccupied with social reform. He would not have been
    so busy with the abolition of the caste system, widow remarriage,
    intercaste marriage, women\'s education, and such social
    activities.\"

MASTER: \"Keshab now believes in Kāli as the Embodiment of Spirit and
Consciousness, the Primal Energy.

Besides, he repeats the holy name of the Mother and chants Her glories.

\"Do you think the Brahmo Samaj will develop in the future into a sort
of social-reform organization?\"

M: \"The soil of this country is different. Only what is true survives
here.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, that is so. The Sanatana Dharma, the Eternal Religion
declared by the rishis, will alone endure. But there will also remain
some sects like the Brahmo Samaj. Everything appears and disappears
through the will of God.\"

Earlier in the afternoon several devotees from Calcutta had visited the
Master and had sung many songs. One of the songs contained the following
idea: \"O Mother, You have cajoled us with red toys. You will certainly
come running to us when we throw them away and cry ourselves hoarse for
You.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"How well they sang about the red toys!\"

M: \"Yes, sir. You once told Kesbab about the red toys.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. I also told him about the Chidakasa, the Inner
Consciousness, and about many other things. Oh, how happy we were! We
used to sing and dance together.\"

**Saturday, January 5, 1884**

It was the twenty-third day of M.\'s stay with Sri Ramakrishna. M. had
finished his midday meal about one o\'clock and was resting in the
nahabat when suddenly he heard someone call his name three or four
times. Coming out, he saw Sri Ramakrishna calling to him from the
verandah north of his room.

M. saluted the Master and they conversed on the south verandah.

MASTER: \"I want to know how you meditate. When I meditated under the
bel-tree I used to see various visions clearly. One day I saw in front
of me money, a shawl, a tray of sandesh and two women. I asked my mind,
\'Mind, do you want any of these?\' I saw the sandesh to be mere filth.
One of the women had a big ring in her nose. I could see both their
inside and outside-entrails, filth, bone, flesh, and blood. The mind did
not want any of these-money, shawl, sweets, or women. It remained fixed
at the Lotus Feet of God.

\"A small balance has two needles, the upper and the lower. The mind is
the lower needle. I was always afraid lest the mind should move away
from the upper needle-God. Further, I would see a man always sitting by
me with a trident in his hand. He threatened to strike me with it if the
lower needle moved away from the upper one.

\"But no spiritual progress is possible without the renunciation of
\'woman and gold\'. I renounced these three: land, wife, and wealth.
Once I went to the Registry Office to register some land, the title of
which was in the name of Raghuvir. The officer asked me to sign my name;
but I didn\'t do it, because I couldn\'t feel that it was \'my\' land. I
was shown much respect as the guru of Keshab Sen. They presented me with
mangoes, but

I couldn\'t carry them home. A sannyasi cannot lay things up.

\"How can one expect to attain God without renunciation? Suppose one
thing is placed upon another; how can you get the second without
removing the first?

\"One must pray to God without any selfish desire. But selfish worship,
if practised with perseverance, is gradually turned into selfless
worship. Dhruva practised tapasya to obtain his kingdom, but at last he
realized God. He said, \'Why should a man give up gold if he gets it
while searching for glass beads?\'

**Master and philanthropy**

\"God can be realized when a man acquires sattva. Householders engage in
philanthropic work, such as charity, mostly with a motive. That is not
good. But actions without motives are good. Yet it is very difficult to
leave motives out of one\'s actions.

\"When you realize God, will you pray to Him, \'O God, please grant that
I may dig reservoirs, build roads, and found hospitals and
dispensaries\'? After the realization of God all such desires are left
behind.

\"Then mustn\'t one perform acts of compassion, such as charity to the
poor? I do not forbid it. If a man has money, he should give it to
remove the sorrows and sufferings that come to his notice. In such an
event the wise man says, \'Give the poor something.\' But inwardly he
feels: \'What can I do? God alone is the Doer. I am nothing.\'

\"The great souls, deeply affected by the sufferings of men, show them
the way to God. Sankaracharya kept the \'ego of Knowledge\' in order to
teach mankind. The gift of knowledge and devotion is far superior to the
gift of food. Therefore Chaitanyadeva distributed bhakti to all,
including the outcaste. Happiness and suffering are the inevitable
characteristics of the body. You have come to eat mangoes. Fulfil that
desire. The one thing needful is jnāna and bhakti. God alone is
Substance; all else is illusory.

\"It is God alone who does everything. You may say that in that case man
may commit sin. But that is not true. If a man is firmly convinced that
God alone is the Doer and that he himself is nothing, then he will never
make a false step.

**Meaning of free will**

\"It is God alone who has planted in man\'s mind what the \'Englishman\'
calls free will. People who have not realized God would become engaged
in more and more sinful actions if God had not planted in them the
notion of free will. Sin would have increased if God had not made the
sinner feel that he alone was responsible for his sin.

\"Those who have realized God are aware that free will is a mere
appearance. In reality man is the machine and God its Operator, man is
the carriage and God its Driver.\"

It was about four o\'clock. Rākhāl and several other devotees were
listening to a kirtan by M. in the hut at the Panchavati. Rākhāl went
into a spiritual mood while listening to the devotional song. After a
while the Master came to the Panchavati accompanied by Baburam and
Harish. Other devotees followed.\'

RĀKHĀL : \"How well he \[referring to M.\] sang kirtan for us! He made
us all very happy.\"

The Master sang in an ecstatic mood:

> *O friends, how great is my relief*
>
> *To hear you chanting Krishna\'s name! . . .*

To the devotees he said, \"Always sing devotional songs\" Continuing, he
said: \"To love God and live in the

company of the devotees: that is all. What more is there?\" He said,
again: \"When Krishna went to Mathura,

Yaśoda came to Radha, who was absorbed in meditation. Afterwards Radha
said to Yaśoda: \'I am the

Primordial Energy. Ask a boon of Me.\' \'What other boon shall I ask of
You?\' said Yaśoda. Only bless me that I may serve God with my body,
mind, and tongue; that I may behold His devotees with these eyes, that I
may meditate on Him with this mind, and that I may chant His name and
glories with this tongue.\'

\"But those who are firmly established in God may do as well without the
devotees. This is true of those who feel the presence of God both within
and without. Sometimes they don\'t enjoy the devotees\' company. You
don\'t whitewash a wall inlaid with mother of pearl-the lime won\'t
stick.\"

The Master returned presently from the Panchavati, talking to M.

MASTER: \"You have the voice of a woman. Can\'t you practise a song such
as this?

> *Tell me, friend, how far is the grove*
>
> *Where Krishna, my Beloved, dwells?*

(To M., pointing to Baburam) \"You see, my own people have become
strangers; Ramlal and my other relatives seem to be foreigners. And
strangers have become my own. Don\'t you notice how I tell Baburam to go
and wash his face? The devotees have become relatives.

(Looking at the Panchavati) \"I used to sit there. In course of time I
became mad. That phase also passed away. Kala, Śiva, is Brahman. That
which sports with Kala is Kāli, the Primal Energy. Kāli moves even the
Immutable.\"

Saying this, the Master sang:

> *My mind is overwhelmed with wonder,*
>
> *Pondering the Mother\'s mystery;*
>
> *Her very name removes*
>
> *The fear of Kala, Death himself;*
>
> *Beneath Her feet lies Maha-Kala. . . .*

Then he said to M.: \"Today is Saturday. Go to the temple of Kāli.\"

As the Master came to the bakul-tree he spoke to M. again: \"Chidatma
and ChitŚakti. The Purusha is the Chidatma and Prakriti the ChitŚakti.
Sri Krishna is the Chidatma and Sri Radha the ChitŚakti. The devotees
are so many forms of the ChitŚakti. They should think of themselves as
companions or handmaids of the ChitŚakti, Sri Radha. This is the whole
gist of the thing.\' \"

After dusk Sri Ramakrishna went to the Kāli temple and was pleased to
see M. meditating there.

The evening worship was over in the temples. The Master returned to his
room and sat on the couch, absorbed in meditation on the Divine Mother.
M. sat on the floor. There was no one else in the room.

The Master was in samādhi. He began to come gradually down to the normal
plane. His mind was still filled with the consciousness of the Divine
Mother. In that state he was speaking to Her like a small child making
importunate demands on his mother. He said in a piteous voice: \"Mother,
why haven\'t You revealed to me that form of Yours, the form that
bewitches the world? I pleaded with You so much for it. But You
wouldn\'t listen to me. You act as You please.\"

The voice in which these words were uttered was very touching.

He went on: \"Mother, one needs faith. Away with this wretched
reasoning! Let it be blighted! One needs faith-faith in the words of the
guru, childlike faith. The mother says to her child, \'A ghost lives
there\'; and the child is firmly convinced that the ghost is there.
Again, the mother says to the child, \'A holy man is there\', and the
child is sure of it. Further, the mother says, pointing to a man, \'He
is your elder brother\', and the child

believes that the man is one hundred and twenty-five per cent his
brother. One needs faith. But why should I blame them, Mother? What can
they do? It is necessary to go through reasoning once. Didn\'t You see
how much I told him about it the other day? But it all proved useless.\"

**Master\'s prayer to the Divine Mother**

The Master was weeping and praying to the Mother in a voice choked with
emotion. He prayed to Her with tearful eyes for the welfare of the
devotees: \"Mother, may those who come to You have all their desires
fulfilled! But please don\'t make them give up everything at once,
Mother. Well, You may do whatever You like in the end. If You keep them
in the world, Mother, then please reveal Yourself to them now and then.
Otherwise, how will they live? How will they be encouraged if they
don\'t see You once in a while? But You may do whatever You like in the
end.\"

**Advice to M**

The Master was still in the ecstatic mood. Suddenly he said to M: \"Look
here, you have had enough of reasoning. No more of it. Promise that you
won\'t reason any more.\"

M. (with folded hands): \"Yes, sir. I won\'t.\"

MASTER: \"You have had enough of it. When you came to me the first time,
I told you your spiritual Ideal. I know everything about you, do I
not?\"

M. (with folded hands): \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, I know everything: what your Ideal is, who you are, your
inside and outside, the events of your past lives, and your future. Do I
not?\"

M. (with folded hands): \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"I scolded you on learning that you had a son. Now go home and
live there. Let them know that you belong to them. But you must remember
in your heart of hearts that you do not belong to them nor they to
you.\"

M. sat in silence. The Master went on instructing him.

MASTER: \"You have now learnt to fly. But keep your loving relationship
with your father. Can\'t you prostrate yourself before him?\"

M. (with folded hands): \"Yes, sir. I can.\"

MASTER: \"What more shall I say to you? You, know everything. You
understand, don\'t you?\"

M. sat there without uttering a word.

MASTER: \"You have understood, haven\'t you?\"

M: \"Yes, sir, I now understand a little.\"

MASTER: \"No, you understand a great deal. Rākhāl \'s father is pleased
about his staying here.\"

M. remained with folded hands.

MASTER: \"Yes, what you are thinking will also come to pass.\"

Sri Ramakrishna now came down to the normal state of mind. Rākhāl and
Ramlal entered the room. At the

Master\'s bidding Ramlal sang:

> *Who is the Woman yonder who lights the field of battle?*
>
> *Darker Her body gleams even than the darkest storm-cloud*
>
> *And from Her teeth there Bash the lightning\'s blinding flames! . .
> .*

He sang again:

> *Who is this terrible Woman, dark as the sky at midnight?*
>
> *Who is this Woman dancing over the field of battle? . . .*

MASTER: \"The Divine Mother and the earthly mother. It is the Divine
Mother who exists in the form of the universe and pervades everything as
Consciousness. The earthly mother gives birth to this body. I used to go
into samādhi uttering the word \'Ma\'. While repeating the word I would
draw the Mother of the Universe to me, as it were, like the fishermen
casting their net and after a while drawing it in. When they draw in the
net they find big fish inside it.

\"Gauri once said that one attains true Knowledge when one realizes the
identity of Kāli and Gaurānga. That which is Brahman is also Śakti,
Kāli. It is That, again, which, assuming the human form, has become
Gaurānga.\"

At the Master\'s request, Ramlal sang again, this time about Gaurānga.

MASTER (to M.): \"The Nitya and the Lila are the two aspects of the
Reality. God, plays in the world as man for the sake of His devotees.
They can love God only if they see Him in a human form; only then can
they show their affection for Him as their Brother, Sister, Father,
Mother, or Child.

\"It is just for this love of the devotees that God contracts Himself
into a human form and descends on earth to play His lila.\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 19**

THE MASTER AND HIS INJURED ARM

> Saturday, February 2, 1884

IT WAS THREE O\'CLOCK in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrisna had been
conversing with Rākhāl , Mahimacharan, Hazra, and other devotees, when
M. entered the room and saluted him. He brought with him splint, pad,
and lint to bandage the Master\'s injured arm.

**Master\'s injured arm**

One day, while going toward the pine-grove, Sri Ramakrishna had fallen
near the railing and dislocated a bone in his left arm. He had been in
an ecstatic mood at the time and no one had been with him.

MASTER (to M.): \"Hello! What was ailing you? Are you quite well now?\"

M: \"Yes, sir, I am all right now.\"

MASTER (to Mahima): \"Well, if I am the machine and God is its operator,
then why should this have happened to me?\"

The Master was sitting on the couch, listening to the story of
Mahimacharan\'s pilgrimage. Mahima had visited several holy places
twelve years before.

MAHlMA: \"I found a brahmachari in a garden at Sicrole in Benares. He
said he had been living there for twenty years but did not know its
owner. He asked me if I worked in an office. On my answering in the
negative, he said, \'Then are you a wandering holy man?\' I saw a sādhu
on the bank of the Narmada. He repeated the Gayatri mentally. It so
thrilled him that the hair on his body stood on end. And when he
repeated the Gayatri and Om aloud, it thrilled those who sat near him
and caused their hair to stand on end.\"

The Master was in the mood of a child. Being hungry he said to M.,
\"What have you brought for me?\" Looking at Rākhāl he went into
samādhi.

He was gradually coming down to the normal plane. To bring his mind back
to the consciousness of the body, he said: \"I shall eat some jilipi. I
shall drink some water.\"

Weeping like a child, he said to the Divine Mother: \"O Brahmamayi! O
Mother! Why hast Thou done this to me? My arm is badly hurt. (To the
devotees) Will I be all right again?\" They consoled him, as one would a
child, and said: \"Surely. You will be quite well again.\"

MASTER (to Rākhāl ): \"You aren\'t to blame for it, though you are
living here to look after me; for even if you had accompanied me, you
certainly wouldn\'t have gone up to the railing.\"

The Master again went into a spiritual mood and said: \"Om! Om! Om!
Mother, what is this that I am saying? Don\'t make me unconscious,
Mother, with the Knowledge of Brahman. Don\'t give me Brahmajnana. I am
but Thy child. I am easily worried and frightened. I want a Mother. A
million salutations to the Knowledge of Brahman! Give it to those who
seek it. O Ānandamayi! O Blissful Mother!\"

Uttering loudly the word \"Ānandamayi\", he burst into tears and said:

> *Mother, this is the grief that sorely grieves my heart.*
>
> *That even with Thee for Mother, and though I am wide awake, There
> should be robbery in my house.*

Again he said to the Divine Mother: \"What wrong have I done, Mother? Do
I ever do anything? It is Thou, Mother, who doest everything. I am the
machine and Thou art its Operator.

(To Rākhāl , smiling) \"See that you don\'t fall! Don\'t be piqued and
cheat yourself.\"

Again addressing the Mother, Sri Ramakrishna said: \"Do I weep because I
am hurt? Not at all.:

> *Mother, this is the grief that sorely grieves my heart,*
>
> *That even with Thee for Mother, and though I am wide awake,*
>
> *There should be robbery in my house.\"*

The Master was again talking and laughing, like a child who, though
ailing, sometimes forgets his illness and laughs and plays about.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"It will avail you nothing unless you realize
Satchidananda. There is nothing like discrimination and renunciation.
The worldly man\'s devotion to God is momentary―like a drop of water on
a redhot frying-pan. Perchance he looks at a flower and exclaims, \'Ah,
what a wonderful creation of God!\'

**Yearning for God**

\"One must be restless for God. If a son clamours persistently for his
share of the property, his parents consult with each other and give it
to him even though he is a minor. God will certainly listen to your
prayers if you feel restless for Him. Since He has begotten us, surely
we can claim our inheritance from Him. He is our own Father, our own
Mother. We can force our demand on Him. We can say to him, \'Reveal
Thyself to me or I shall cut my throat with a knife!\' \"

Sri Ramakrishna taught the devotees how to call on the Divine Mother.

**Master\'s prayer to the Divine Mother**

MASTER: \"I used to pray to Her in this way: \'O Mother! O Blissful One!
Reveal Thyself to me. Thou must!\' Again, I would say to Her: \'O Lord
of the lowly! O Lord of the universe! Surely I am not outside Thy
universe. I am bereft of knowledge. I am without discipline. I have no
devotion. I know nothing. Thou must be gracious and reveal Thyself to
me.\' \"

Thus the Master taught the devotees how to pray. They were deeply
touched. Tears filled Mahimacharan\'s eyes.

Sri Ramakrishna looked at him and sang:

> *Cry to your Mother Syama with a real cry, O mind!*
>
> *And how can She hold Herself from you?*
>
> *How can Syama stay away?..*

Several devotees arrived from Shibpur. Since they had come from a great
distance the Master could not disappoint them. He told them some of the
essentials of spiritual life.

MASTER: \"God alone is real, and all else illusory. The garden and its
owner. God and His splendour. But people look at the garden only. How
few seek out the owner!\"

**Prayer and discrimination**

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, what is the way?\"

MASTER: \"Discrimination between the Real and the unreal. One should
always discriminate to the effect that God alone is real and the world
unreal. And one should pray with sincere longing.\"

DEVOTEE: \"But, sir, where is our leisure for these things?\"

MASTER: \"Those who have the time must meditate and worship. But those
who cannot possibly do so must bow down whole-heartedly to God twice a
day. He abides in the hearts of all; He knows that worldly people have
many things to do. What else is possible for them? You don\'t have time
to pray to God; therefore give Him the power of attorney. But all is in
vain unless you attain God and see Him.\"

ANOTHER DEVOTEE: \"Sir, to see you is the same as to see God.\"

MASTER: \"Don\'t ever say that again. The waves belong to the Ganges,
not the Ganges to the waves. A man cannot realize God unless he gets rid
of all such egotistic ideas as \'I am such an important man\' or \'I am
so and so\'. Level the mound of \'I\' to the ground by dissolving it
with tears of devotion.\"

DEVOTEE: \"Why has God put us in the world?\"

MASTER: \"To perpetuate His creation. It is His will, His maya. He has
deluded man with \'woman and gold\'.\"

DEVOTEE: \"Why has He deluded us? Why has He so willed?\"

MASTER: \"If but once He should give man a taste of divine joy, then man
would not care to lead a worldly life. The creation would come to an
end.

\"The grain-dealer stores rice in huge bags in his warehouse. Near them
he puts some puffed rice in a tray. This is to keep the rats away. The
puffed rice tastes sweet to the rats and they nibble at it all night;
they do not seek the rice itself. But just think! One seer of rice
yields fourteen seers of puffed rice. How infinitely superior is the joy
of God to the pleasure of \'woman and gold\'! To one who thinks of the
beauty of God, the beauty of even Rambha and Tilottama appears as but
the ashes of a funeral pyre.\"

DEVOTEE: \"Why do we not feel intense restlessness to realize Him?\"

MASTER: \"A man does not feel restless for God until all his worldly
desires are satisfied. He does not remember the Mother of the Universe
until his share of the enjoyment of \'woman and gold\' is completed. A
child absorbed in play does not seek his mother. But after his play is
over, he says, \'Mother! I must go to my mother.\' Hriday\'s son was
playing with the pigeons, calling to them, \'Come! Ti, ti!\' When he had
had enough of play he began to cry. Then a stranger came and said:
\'Come with me. I will take you to your mother.\' Unhesitatingly he
climbed on the man\'s shoulders and was off.

\"Those who are eternally free do not have to enter worldly life. Their
desire for enjoyment has been satisfied with their very birth.\"

At five o\'clock in the afternoon Dr. Madhusudan arrived. While he
prepared the bandage for the Master\'s arm, Sri Ramakrishna laughed like
a child and said, \"You are the Madhusudan of both this world and the
next!\"

DR. MADHUSUDAN (smiling): \"I only labour under the weight of my name.\"

**The power of God\'s name**

MASTER (smiling): \"Why, is the name a trifling thing? God is not
different from His name. Satyabhama tried to balance Krishna with gold
and precious stones, but could not do it. Then Rukmini put a tulsi-leaf
with the name of Krishna on the scales. That balanced the Lord.\"

The doctor was ready to bandage the Master\'s arm. A bed was spread on
the floor and the Master, laughing, lay down upon it. He said, intoning
the words: \"Ah! This is Radha\'s final stage. But Brinde says, \'Who
knows what is yet to be?\' \"

The devotees were sitting around the Master. He sang:

> *The gopis all were gathered about the shore of the lake.*

Sri Ramakrishna laughed and the devotees laughed with him.

After his arm was bandaged he said: \"I haven\'t very much faith in your
Calcutta physicians. When Sambhu

became delirious, Dr. Sarvadhikari said: \'Oh, it is nothing. It is just
grogginess from the medicine. And a little while after, Sambhu breathed
his last.\"

It was evening and the worship in the temples was over. A few minutes
later Adhar arrived from Calcutta to see the Master. Mahimacharan,
Rākhāl , and M. were in the room.

ADHAR: \"How are you?\"

MASTER (affectionately): \"Look here. How my arm hurts! (Smiling) You
don\'t have to ask how I am!\"

Adhar sat on the floor with the devotees. The Master said to him,
\"Please stroke here gently.\" Adhar sat on the end of the couch and
gently stroked Sri Ramakrishna\'s feet.

**The Master conversed with Mahimācharan.**

MASTER: \"It will be very good if you can practise unselfish love for
God. A man who has such love says: \'O Lord, I do not seek salvation,
fame, wealth, or cure of disease. None of these do I seek. I want only
Thee.\' Many are the people who come to a rich man with various desires.
But if someone comes to him simply out of love, not wanting any favour,
then the rich man feels attracted to him. Prahlada had this unselfish
love, this pure love for God without any worldly end.\"

Mahimacharan sat silent. The Master turned to him.

**Ego separates one from Brahman**

MASTER: \"Now let me tell you something that will agree with your mood.
According to the Vedānta one has to know the real nature of one\'s own
Self. But such knowledge is impossible without the renunciation of ego.
The ego is like a stick that seems to divide the water in two. It makes
you feel that you are one and I am another. When the ego disappears in
samādhi, then one knows Brahman to be one\'s own inner consciousness.

\"One must renounce the \'I\' that makes one feel, \'I am Mahima
Chakravarty\', \'I am a learned man\', and so on. But the \'ego of
Knowledge\' does not injure one. Sankaracharya retained the \'ego of
Knowledge\' in order to teach mankind.

**Warning about lust**

\"One cannot obtain the Knowledge of Brahman unless one is extremely
cautious about women. Therefore it is very difficult for those who live
in the world to get such Knowledge. However clever you may be, you will
stain your body if you live in a sooty room. The company of a young
woman evokes lust even in a lustless man.

\"But it is not so harmful for a householder who follows the path of
knowledge to enjoy conjugal happiness with his own wife now and then. He
may satisfy his sexual impulse like any other natural impulse. Yes, you
may enjoy a sweetmeat once in a while. (Mahimacharan laughs.) It is not
so harmful for a householder.

**Hard discipline for sannyasi**

\"But it is extremely harmful for a sannyasi. He must not look even at
the portrait of a woman. A monk enjoying a woman is like a man
swallowing the spittle he has already spat out. A sannyasi must not sit
near a woman and talk to her, even if she is intensely pious. No, he
must not talk to a woman even though he may have controlled his passion.

\"A sannyasi must renounce both \'woman\' and \'gold\'. As he must not
look even at the portrait of a woman, so also he must not touch gold,
that is to say, money. It is bad for him even to keep money near him,
for it brings in its train calculation, worry, insolence, anger, and
such evils. There is an instance in the sun: it

shines brightly; suddenly a cloud appears and hides it.

\"That is why I didn\'t agree to the Mārwāri\'s depositing money for me
with Hriday. I said: \'No, I won\'t allow even that. If I keep money
near me, it will certainly raise clouds.\'

\"Why all these strict rules for a sannyasi? It is for the welfare of
mankind as well as for his own good. A sannyasi may himself lead an
unattached life and may have controlled his passion, but he must
renounce \'woman and gold\' to set an example to the world.

\"A man will have the courage to practise renunciation if he sees one
hundred percent renunciation in a sannyasi. Then only will he try to
give up \'woman and gold\'. If a sannyasi does not set this example,
then who will?

\"One may lead a householder\'s life after realizing God. It is like
churning butter from milk and then keeping the butter in water. Janaka
led the life of a householder after attaining Brahmajnana.

\"Janaka fenced with two swords, the one of jnāna and the other of
karma. The sannyasi renounces action; therefore he fences with one sword
only, that of knowledge. A householder, endowed with knowledge like
Janaka\'s, can enjoy fruit both from the tree and from the ground. He
can serve holy men, entertain guests, and do other things like that. I
said to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother, I don\'t want to be a dry
sādhu.\'

\"After attaining Brahmajnana one does not have to discriminate even
about food. The rishis of olden times, endowed with the Knowledge of
Brahman and having experienced divine bliss, ate everything, even pork.

(To Mahima) \"Generally speaking there are two kinds of yoga: karmayoga
and manoyoga, that is to say, union with God through work and through
the mind.

**Four stages of life**

\"There are four stages of life: brahmacharya, garhasthya, Vanaprastha,
and sannyas. During the first three stages a man has to perform his
worldly duties. The sannyasi carries only his staff, water-pot, and
begging-bowl. He too may perform certain nityakarma, but his mind is not
attached to it; he is not conscious of doing such work. Some sannyasis
perform nityakarma to set an example to the world. If a householder or a
man belonging to the other stages of life performs action without
attachment, then he is united with God through such action.

\"In the case of a paramahamsa, like Sukadeva, all karmas-all puja,
japa, tarpan, sandhya, and so forth-drop away. In this state a man
communes with God through the mind alone. Sometimes he may be pleased to
perform outward activities for the welfare of mankind. But his
recollection and contemplation of God remain uninterrupted.\"

It was about eight o\'clock in the evening. Sri Ramakrishna asked
Mahimacharan to recite a few hymns from the scriptures. Mahima read the
first verse of the Uttara Gitā, describing the nature of the Supreme
Brahman:

> *He, Brahman, is one, partless, stainless, and beyond the ether;*
>
> *Without beginning or end, unknowable by mind or intelligence.*

Finally he came to the seventh verse of the third chapter, which reads:

> *The twice-born worships the Deity in fire,*
>
> *The munis contemplate Him in the heart,*
>
> *Men of limited wisdom see Him in the image,*
>
> *And the yogis who have attained samesightedness*
>
> *Behold Him everywhere.*

No sooner did the Master hear the words \"the yogis who have attained
samesightedness\" than he stood up and went into samādhi, his arm
supported by the splint and bandage. Speechless, the devotees looked at
this yogi who had himself attained the state of samesightedness.

After a long time the Master regained consciousness of the outer world
and took his seat. He asked Mahima to recite verses describing the love
of God. The latter recited from the Nārada Pancharatra:

> *What need is there of penance if God is worshipped with love?*
>
> *What is the use of penance if God is not worshipped with love?*
>
> *What need is there of penance if God is seen within and without?*
>
> *What is the use of penance if God is not seen within and without?*
>
> *O Brahman! O my child! Cease from practising further penances.*
>
> *Hasten to Sankara, the Ocean of Heavenly Wisdom;*
>
> *Obtain from Him the love of God, the pure love praised by devotees,*
>
> *Which snaps in twain the shackles that bind you to the world.*

MASTER: \"Ah! Ah!\"

On hearing these verses the Master was about to go again into an
ecstatic mood, but he restrained himself with effort.

Mahima read from the Yati--Panchaka:

I am She, the Divine Mother, in whom the illusion of the universe of
animate and inanimate things is seen, as in magic, and in whom the
universe shines, being the play of Her mind. I am She, the Embodiment of
Consciousness, who is the Self of the universe, the only Existence,
Knowledge, and Bliss.

When the Master heard the line, \"I am She, the Embodiment of
Consciousness\", he said with a smile, \"Whatever is in the microcosm is
also in the macrocosm.\"

Next Mahima read the Six Stanzas of *Nirvāna* :

> *Om. I am neither mind, intelligence, ego, nor chitta,*
>
> *Neither ears nor tongue nor the senses of smell and sight;*
>
> *Nor am I ether, earth, fire, water, or air:*
>
> *I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*
>
> *I am neither the prana, nor the five vital breaths,*
>
> *Neither the seven elements of the body nor its five sheaths,*
>
> *Nor hands nor feet nor tongue, nor the organs of sex and voiding:*
>
> *I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*
>
> *Neither loathing nor liking have I, neither greed nor delusion;*
>
> *No sense have I of ego or pride, neither dharma nor moksha;*
>
> *Neither desire of the mind nor object for its desiring:*
>
> *I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*
>
> *Neither right nor wrong doing am I, neither pleasure nor pain,*
>
> *Nor the mantra, the sacred place, the Vedas, the sacrifice;*
>
> *Neither the act of eating, the eater, nor the food:*

*I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*

> *Death or fear I have none, nor any distinction of caste;*
>
> *Neither father nor mother nor even a birth have I;*

*Neither friend nor comrade, neither disciple nor guru:*

*I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am Śiva!*

1.  *have no form or fancy; the All-pervading am I; Eyerywhere I exist,
    > yet I am beyond the senses; Neither salvation am I, nor anything
    > that may be known: I am Pure Knowledge and Bliss: I am Śiva! I am
    > Śiva!*

Each time Mahima repeated: *\"I am Śiva! I am Śiva!\",* the Master
rejoined with a smile: \"Not I! Not I! Thou art Knowledge Absolute.\"

Mahima read a few more verses and also a description of the six psychic
centres of the body. He said that in Benares he had witnessed the death
of a yogi in the state of yoga.

MAHIMA: \"There are fine passages in the Rāma Gitā.\"

MASTER: \"You are speaking of the Rāma Gitā. Then you must be a staunch
Vedantist. How many books of that kind the sādhus used to read here!\"

Mahima recited the description of Om:

> *It is like the unceasing flow of oil; like the long peal of a bell.*

About the characteristics of samādhi he read: \"The man established in
samādhi sees the upper region filled with Ātman, the nether region
filled with Ātman, the middle region filled with Ātman. He sees all
filled with Ātman.\"

Adhar and Mahima saluted the Master and departed.

At noon the following day, after his midday meal, Sri Ramakrishna was
sitting on the small couch, when Ram, Surendra, and a few other devotees
arrived from Calcutta. They were worried about the Master\'s injured
arm. The arm was bandaged. M. was present.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"The Mother has put me in such a state of
mind that I cannot hide anything from anyone. Mine is the condition of a
child. Rākhāl doesn\'t understand it. He covers my injured arm, wrapping
my body with a cloth lest others should see my injury and criticize me.
He took Dr. Madhu aside and reported my illness. But I shouted and said:
\'Hello! Where are you, Madhusudan? Come and see. My arm is broken!\'

\"I used to sleep in the same room with Mathur and his wife.

child. I was then passing through a state of divine madness.

conversation?\' \'Yes\', I would reply.

They took care of me as if I were their own Mathur would ask me,
\'Father, do you hear our

\"Once Mathur\'s wife became suspicious of his movements and said to
him, \'If you go anywhere, he must accompany you.\' One day Mathur went
to a certain place and asked me to wait downstairs. He returned after
half an hour and said to me: \'Come, father, let us go now. The carriage
is waiting.\' When Mathur\'s wife asked me about it, I reported the
thing correctly. I said to her: \'We went to a certain house. He told me
to stay downstairs and himself went upstairs. He came down after half an
hour and we left the place.\' Of course she understood the thing in her
own way.

\"A partner of Mathur\'s estate used to take fruits and vegetables
stealthily from the temple garden. When the other partners asked me
about it, I told them the exact truth.\"

**Sunday, February 24, 1884**

Sri Ramakrishna was resting in his room after his midday meal, and Mani
Mallick was sitting on the floor

beside him, when M. arrived. M. saluted the Master and sat down beside
Mani. The Master\'s injured arm was

bandaged.

MASTER (to M.): \"How did you come?\"

1.  \"I came as far as Alambazar in a carriage and from there I
    walked.\" MANILAL: \"Oh, he is so hot!\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"This makes me think that all these are not mere
fancies of my brain. Otherwise why should these \'Englishmen\' take so
much trouble to come here?\"

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk to them about his health and his injured
arm.

**Master\'s childlike impatience**

MASTER: \"Now and then I become impatient about my arm. I show it to
this or that man and ask him whether I shall get well again. That makes
Rākhāl angry. He doesn\'t understand my mood. Now and then I say to
myself, \'Let him go away.\' Again I say to the Mother: \'Mother, where
will he go? Why should he burn himself in the frying-pan of the world?\'

\"This childlike impatience of mine is nothing new. I used to ask Mathur
Babu to feel my pulse and tell me whether I was ill.

\"Well, where then is my faith in God? Once I was going to Kamarpukur in
a bullock-cart, when several persons came up to the cart with clubs in
their hands. They looked like highwaymen. I began to chant the names of
the gods. Sometimes I repeated the names of Rāma and Durga, and some
times \'Om Tat Sat\', so that in case one failed another would work.

(To M.) \"Can you tell me why I am so impatient?\"

1.  \"Your mind, sir, is always absorbed in samādhi. You have kept a
    fraction of it on your body for the welfare of the devotees.
    Therefore you feel impatient now and then for your body\'s safety.\"

MASTER: \"That is true. A little of the mind is attached to the body. It
wants to enjoy the love of God and the company of the devotees.\"

Mani Mallick told the Master about an exhibition that was being held in
Calcutta. He described a beautiful image of Yaśoda with the Baby Krishna
on her lap. Sri Ramakrishna\'s eyes filled with tears. On hearing about
Yaśoda, the embodiment of maternal love, his spiritual consciousness was
kindled and he wept. .

MANILAL: \"If you were not unwell, you could visit the exhibition in the
Maidan.\"

MASTER (to M. and the others): \"I shan\'t be able to see everything
even if I go. Perhaps my eyes will fall on some certain thing and I
shall become unconscious. Then I shall not be able to see the rest. I
was taken to the Zoological Garden. I Went into samādhi at the sight of
the lion, for the carrier of the Mother awakened in my mind the
consciousness of the Mother Herself. In that state who could see the
other animals? I had to return home after seeing only the lion. Hence
Jadu Mallick\'s mother first suggested that I should go to the
exhibition and then said I should not.\"

Mani Mallick, about sixty-five years old, had been a member of the
Brahmo Samaj for many years, and Sri Ramakrishna gave him instruction
that would agree with his mood.

MASTER: \"Pundit Jaynarayan had very liberal views. I visited him once
and liked his attitude. But his sons wore high boots. He told me he
intended to go to Benares and live there, and at last he carried out his
intention; for later on he did live in Benares and die there. When one
grows old one should retire, like Jaynarayan, and devote oneself to the
thought of God. What do you say?\"

MANILAL: \"True, sir. I don\'t relish the worries and troubles of the
world.\"

MASTER: \"Gauri used to worship his wife with offerings of flowers. All
women are manifestations of the Divine Mother. (To Manilal) Please tell
them that little story of yours.\"

MANILAL (smiling): \"Once several men were crossing the Ganges in a
boat. One of them, a pundit, was making a great display of his
erudition, saying that he had studied various books-the Vedas, the
Vedānta, and the six systems of philosophy. He asked a fellow passenger,
\'Do you know the Vedānta?\' \'No, revered sir.\' \'The Samkhya and the
Patanjala?\' \'No, revered sir.\' \'Have you read no philosophy
whatsoever?\' \'No, revered sir.\' The pundit was talking in this vain
way and the passenger sitting in silence, when a great storm arose and
the boat was about to sink. The passenger said to the pundit, \'Sir, can
you swim?\' \'No\', replied the pundit. The passenger said, \'I don\'t
know the Samkhya or the Patanjala, but I can swim.\' \"

MASTER (smiling): \"What will a man gain by knowing many scriptures? The
one thing needful is to know how to cross the river of the world. God
alone is real, and all else illusory.

\"While Arjuna was aiming his arrow at the eye of the bird, Drona asked
him: \'What do you see? Do you see these kings?\' \'No, sir\', replied
Arjuna. \'Do you \'See me\'?\' \'No.\' \'The tree?\' \'No.\' \'The bird
on the tree?\' \'No.\' \'What do you see then?\' \'Only the eye of the
bird.\'

\"He who sees only the eye of the bird can hit the mark. He alone is
clever who sees that God is real and all else is illusory. What need
have I of other information? Hanuman once remarked: \'I don\'t know
anything about the phase of the moon or the position of the stars. I
only contemplate Rāma.\'

(To M.) \"Please buy a few fans for our use here.

(To Manilal) \"Look here, pay a visit to his \[meaning M.\'s\] father.
The sight of a devotee will inspire you.

**God\'s manifestation as man**

(To M.) \"Since my arm was injured a deep change has come over me. I now
delight only in the Naralila, the human manifestation of God. Nitya and
Lila. The Nitya is the Indivisible Satchidananda, and the Lila, or
Sport, takes various forms, such as the Lila as God, the Lila as the
deities, the Lila as man, and the Lila as the universe.

\"Vaishnavcharan. used to say that one has attained Perfect Knowledge if
one believes in God sporting as man. I wouldn\'t adopt it then. But now
I realize that he was right. Vaishnavcharan liked pictures of man
expressing tenderness and love.

(To Manilal) \"It is God Himself who is sporting in the form of man. It
is He alone, who has become Mani Mallick. The Sikhs teach: \'Thou art
Satchidananda.\'

\"Now and then man catches a glimpse of his real Self and becomes
speechless with wonder. At such times he swims in an ocean of joy. It is
like suddenly meeting a dear relative. (To M.) The other day as I was
coming here in a carriage, I felt like that at the sight of Baburam.
When Śiva realizes His own Self, He dances about in joy exclaiming,
\'What am I! What am I!\'

\"The same thing has been described in the Adhyātma Rāmāyana. Nārada
said, \'O Rāma, all men are Thy forms, and it is Sita who has become all
women.\' On looking at the actors in the Ramlila, I felt that Narayana
Himself had taken these human forms. The genuine and the imitation
appeared to be the same.

\"Why do people worship virgins? All women are so many forms of the
Divine Mother. But Her manifestation is greatest in pure-souled virgins.

(To M.) \"Why do I become impatient when I am ill? Because the Mother
has placed me in the state of a child.

The child depends entirely on its mother. The child of the maidservant,
when he quarrels with the child of the master, says, \'I shall tell my
mother.\'

\"I was taken to Radhabazar to be photographed. It had been arranged
that I should go to Rajendra Mitra\'s house that day. I heard that
Keshab would be there. I planned to tell them certain things, but I
forgot it all when I went to Radhabazar. I said: \'O Mother, Thou wilt
speak. What shall I say?\'

\"I have not the nature of a Jnāni. He considers himself great. He says,
\'What? How can I be ill?\'

\"Koar Singh once said to me, \'You still worry about your body.\' But
it is my nature to believe that my Mother knows everything. It was She
who would speak at Rajendra Mitra\'s house. Hers are the only effective
words. One ray of light from the Goddess of Wisdom stuns a thousand
scholars.

\"The Mother has kept me in the state of a bhakta, a vijnāni. That is
why I joke with Rākhāl and the others.

Had I been in the condition of a Jnāni I couldn\'t do that.

\"In this state I realize that it is the Mother alone who has become
everything. I see Her everywhere. In the Kāli temple I found that the
Mother Herself had become everything-even the wicked, even the brother
of Bhagavat Pundit.

\"Once I was about to scold Ramlal\'s mother, but I had to restrain
myself. I saw her to be a form of the Divine Mother. I worship virgins
because I see in them the Divine Mother. My wife strokes my feet, but I
salute her afterwards.

\"You salute me by touching my feet.

wouldn\'t have allowed anyone to do it.

state in which I see God in everything.

But had Hriday been here, who would have dared to touch them? He I have
to return your salutes because the Mother has placed me in a

\"You see, one cannot exclude even a wicked person. A tulsi-leaf,
however dry or small, can be used for worship in the temple.\"

**Sunday, March 2, 1884**

**Trailokya\'s songs**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch in his room, listening to
devotional music by Trailokya Sannyal of the Brahmo Samaj. He had not
yet recovered from the effects of the injury to his arm, which was still
supported by a splint. Many devotees, including, Narendra, Srendra, and
M., were sitting on the floor.

Narendra\'s father, a lawyer of the High Court of Calcutta, had passed
away suddenly. He had not been able to make provision for the family,
which consequently faced grave financial difficulties. The members of
the family sometimes had to go without food. Narendra was therefore
passing his days in great anxiety.

Trailokya sang about the Divine Mother:

> *O Mother, I hide myself in Thy loving bosom;*
>
> *I gaze at Thy face and cry out, \"Mother! Mother!\"*
>
> *I sink in the Sea of Bliss and am lost to sense*
>
> *In yoga-sleep; I gaze with unwinking eyes*
>
> *Upon Thy face, powerless to turn away.*
>
> *O Mother, I am terrified by this world;*
>
> *My spirit trembles and cries out in fear.*
>
> *Keep me, sweet Mother, in Thy loving bosom;*
>
> *Cover me with the spreading skirt of Thy love.*
>
> *The Master shed tears of love and cried out, \"Ah me! Ah me!\"*

Trailokya sang again:

> *O Lord, Destroyer of my shame! Who but Thyself can save*
>
> *The honour of Thy devotee?*
>
> *Thou art the Ruler of my soul, my very life\'s Support,*
>
> *And I am Thy slave for evermore. . . .*

He continued:

> *Seeking a shelter at Thy feet,*
>
> *I have forever set aside*
>
> *My pride of caste and race, O Lord,*
>
> *And turned my back on fear and shame.*
>
> *A lonely pilgrim on life\'s way,*
>
> *Where shall I go for succour now?*
>
> *For Thy sake, Lord, I bear men\'s blame;*
>
> *They rail at me with bitter words*
>
> *And hate me for my love of Thee.*
>
> *Both friends and strangers use me ill.*
>
> *Thou art the Guardian of my name;*
>
> *Thou mayest save or slay me, Lord!*
>
> *Upon the honour of Thy servant*
>
> *Rests, O Lord, Thy name as well;*
>
> *Thou art the Ruler of my soul,*
>
> *The glow of love within my heart;*
>
> *Do with me as it pleases Thee!*

Once more he sang:

> *Lord, Thou hast taken me from home and made me captive with Thy love;
> Shield me for ever at Thy feet, O Thou Beloved One! Upon the Nectar of
> Thy love, feed me both day and night, And save Premdas, who is Thy
> slave.*

The Master again shed tears of joy. He sang some lines from a song of
Ramprasad:

> *Glory and shame, bitter and sweet, are Thine alone;*
>
> *This world is nothing but Thy play.*
>
> *Then why, O Blissful One, dost Thou cause a rift in it?*

Addressing Trailokya, the Master said: \"Ah! How touching your songs
are! They are genuine. Only he who has gone to the ocean can fetch its
water.\"

Trailokya sang again:

> *Thou it is that dancest, Lord, and Thou that singest the song;*
>
> *Thou it is that clappest Thy hands in time with the music\'s beat;*
>
> *But man, who is an onlooker merely, foolishly thinks it is he.*
>
> *Though but a puppet, man becomes a god if he moves with Thee; Thou
> art the Mover of the machine, the Driver of the car; But man is
> weighted down with woe, dreaming that he is free.*
>
> *Thou art the Root of everything, Thou the Soul of our souls;*
>
> *Thou art the Master of our hearts; through Thine unbounded grace Thou
> turnest even the meanest sinner into the mightiest saint.*

The singing came to an end. The Master engaged in conversation with the
devotees.

**Process of negation and affirmation & God Himself has become
everything**

MASTER: \"God alone is the Master, and again, He is the Servant. This
attitude indicates Perfect Knowledge. At first one discriminates, \'Not
this, not this\', and feels that God alone is real and all else is
illusory. Afterwards the same person finds that it is God Himself who
has become all this-the universe, maya, and the living beings. First
negation and then affirmation. This is the view held by the Puranas. A
vilwa-fruit, for instance, includes flesh, seeds, and shell. You get the
flesh by discarding the shell and seeds. But if you want to know the
weight of the fruit, you cannot find it if you discard the shell and
seeds. Just so, one should attain Sarchidananda by negating the universe
and its living beings. But after the attainment of Satchidananda one
finds that Satchidananda Itself has become the universe and the living
beings. It is of one substance that the flesh and the shell and seeds
are made, just like butter and buttermilk.

**The world does not exist apart from God**

\"It may be asked, \'How has Satchidananda become so hard?\' This earth
does indeed feel very hard to the touch. The answer is that blood and
semen are thin liquids, and yet out of them comes such a big creature as
man. Everything is possible for God. First of all reach the indivisible
Satchidananda, and then, coming down, look at the universe. You will
then find that everything is Its manifestation. It is God alone who has
become everything. The world by no means exists apart from Him.

\"All elements finally merge in Ākāśa. Again, at the time of creation,
Ākāśa evolves into mahat and mahat into Ahamkāra. In this way the whole
world-system is evolved. It is the process of involution and evolution.
A devotee of God accepts everything. He accepts the universe and its
created beings as well as the indivisible Satchidananda.

\"But the yogi\'s path is different. He does not come back after
reaching the Paramatman, the Supreme Soul.

He becomes united with It.

\"The \'partial knower\' limits God to one object only. He thinks that
God cannot exist in anything beyond that.

**Three classes of devotees**

\"There are three classes of devotees. The lowest one says, \'God is up
there.\' That is, he points to heaven. The mediocre devotee says that
God dwells in the heart as the \'Inner Controller\'. But the highest
devotee says: \'God alone has become everything. All that we perceive is
so many forms of God.\' Narendra used to make fun of me and say: \'Yes,
God has become all! Then a pot is God, a cup is God!\' (Laughter.)

**Vision of God destroys doubts**

\"All doubts disappear when one sees God. It is one thing to hear of
God, but quite a different thing to see Him. A man cannot have one
hundred per cent conviction through mere hearing. But if he beholds God
face to face, then he is wholly convinced.

\"Formal worship drops away after the vision of God. It was thus that my
worship in the temple came to an end. I used to worship the Deity in the
Kāli temple. It was suddenly revealed to me that everything is Pure
Spirit. The utensils of worship, the altar, the door-frame-all Pure
Spirit. Men, animals, and other living beings-all Pure Spirit. Then like
a madman I began to shower flowers in all directions. Whatever I saw I
worshipped.

\"One day, while worshipping Śiva, I was about to offer a bel-leaf on
the head of the image, when it was revealed to me that this Virat, this
Universe, itself is Śiva. After that my worship of Śiva through the
image came to an end. Another day I had been plucking flowers, when it
was revealed to me that the flowering plants were so many bouquets.\"

TRAILOKYA: \"Ah! How beautiful is God\'s creation!\"

MASTER: \"Oh no, it is not that. It was revealed to me in a flash. I
didn\'t calculate about it. It was shown to me that each plant was a
bouquet adorning the Universal Form of God. That was the end of my
plucking flowers. I look on man in just the same way. When I see a man,
I see that it is God Himself who walks on earth, as it were, rocking to
and fro, like a pillow floating on the waves. The pillow moves with the
waves. It bobs up and down.

\"The body has, indeed, only a momentary existence. God alone is real.
Now the body exists, and now it does not. Years ago, when I had been
suffering terribly from indigestion, Hriday said to me, \'Do ask the
Mother to cure you.\' I felt ashamed to speak to Her about my illness. I
said to Her:

\'Mother, I saw a skeleton in the Asiatic Society Museum. It was pieced
together with wires into a human form. O Mother, please keep my body
together a little, like that, so that I may sing Thy name and glories.\'

\"Why this desire to live? After Ravana\'s death Rāma and Lakshmana
entered his capital and saw Nikasha, his old mother, running away.
Lakshmana was surprised at this and said to Rāma, \'All her children are
dead, but still life attracts her so much!\' Rāma called Nikasha to His
side and said: \'Don\'t be afraid. Why are you running away?\' She
replied: \'Rāma, it was not fear that made me flee from You. I have been
able to see all these wondrous actions of Yours simply because I am
alive. I shall see many more things like these if I continue to live.
Hence I desire to live.\'

\"Without desires the body cannot live. (Smiling) I had one or two
desires. I prayed to the Mother, \'O Mother, give me the company of
those who have renounced \"woman and gold\".\' I said further: \'I
should like to enjoy the society of Thy jnanis and bhaktas. So give me a
little strength that I may walk hither and thither and visit those
people.\' But She did not give me the strength to walk.\"

TRAlLOKYA (smiling): \"Have all the desires been fulfilled?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"No, there are still a few left. (All laugh.)

\"The body is really impermanent. When my arm was broken I said to the
Mother, \'Mother, it hurts me very much.\' At once She revealed to me a
carriage and its driver. Here and there a few screws were loose. The
carriage moved as the driver directed it. It had no power of its own.

\"Why then do I take care of the body? It is to enjoy God, to sing His
name and glories, and to go about visiting His jnanis and bhaktas.\"

**Master\'s sympathy for Narendra\'s suffering**

Narendra was sitting on the floor in front of the Master.

MASTER (to Trailokya and the other devotees): \"The joys and sorrows of
the body are inevitable. Look at Narendra. His father is dead, and his
people have been put to extreme suffering. He can\'t find any way out of
it. God places one sometimes in happiness and sometimes in misery.\"

TRAILOKYA: \"Revered sir, God will be gracious to Narendra.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"But when? It is true that no one starves at the
temple of Annapurna in Benares; but some must wait for food till
evening.

\"Once Hriday asked Sambhu Mallick for some money. Sambhu held the views
of \'Englishmen\' on such matters. He said to Hriday: \'Why should I
give you money? You can earn your livelihood by working. Even now you
are earning something. The case of a very poor person is different. The
purpose of charity is fulfilled if one gives money to the blind or the
lame.\' Thereupon Hriday said: \'Sir, please don\'t say that. I don\'t
need your money. May God help me not to become blind or deaf or
extremely poor! I don\'t want you to give, and I don\'t want to
receive.\' \"

The Master spoke as if piqued because God had not yet shown His kindness
to Narendra. Now and then he cast an affectionate glance at his beloved
disciple.

NARENDRA: \"I am now studying the views of the atheists.\"

MASTER: \"There are two doctrines: the existence and the non-existence
of God. Why don\'t you accept the first?\"

SURENDRA: \"God is just. He must look after His devotees.\"

MASTER: \"It is said in the scriptures that only those who have been
charitable in their former births get money in this life. But to tell
you the truth, this world is God\'s maya. And there are many confusing
things in this realm of maya. One cannot comprehend them.

**God\'s ways are inscrutable**

\"The ways of God are inscrutable indeed. Bhishma lay on his bed of
arrows. The Pandava brothers visited him in Krishna\'s company.
Presently Bhishma burst into tears. The Pandavas said to Krishna:
\'Krishna, how amazing this is! Our grandsire Bhishma is one of the
eight Vasus. Another man as wise as he is not to be found. Yet even he
is bewildered by maya and weeps at death.\' \'But\', said Krishna,
\'Bhishma isn\'t weeping on that account. You may ask him about it.\'
When asked, Bhishma said: \'O Krishna, I am unable to understand
anything of the ways of God; God Himself is the constant companion of
the Pandavas, and still they have no end of trouble. That is why I weep.
When I reflect on this, I realize that one cannot understand anything of
God\'s ways.\'

\"God has revealed to me that only the Paramatman, whom the Vedas
describe as the Pure Soul, is as immutable as Mount Sumeru, unattached,
and beyond pain and pleasure. There is much confusion in this world of
His maya. One can by no means say that \'this\' will come after \'that\'
or \'this\' will produce \'that\'.\"

SURENDRA (smiling): \"If by giving away money in a. previous birth one
gets wealth in this life, then we should all give away money now.\"

MASTER: \"Those who have money should give it to the poor and needy. (To
Trailokya) Jaygopal Sen is well-to-do. He should be charitable. That he
is not so is to his discredit. There are some who are miserly even
though they have money. There is no knowing who will enjoy their money
afterwards.

\"Jaygopal came here the other day. He drove over here in a carriage.
The lamps were broken, the horse seemed to have been returned from the
charnel-house, and the coachman looked as if he had just been discharged
from the Medical College Hospital. And he brought me two rotten
pomegranates!\" (All laugh.)

SURENDRA: \"Jaygopal Babu belongs to the Brahmo Samaj. I understand that
now there is not one worth-while man in Keshab\'s organization. Vijay
Goswami, Shivanath, and other notables have organized the Sadharan
Brahmo Samaj.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Govinda Adhikari, it is said, would not keep good
actors in his theatre lest they should claim a share of the profit. (All
laugh.)

\"The other day I saw a disciple of Keshab. A theatrical performance was
being given in Keshab\'s house, and I saw the disciple dancing on the
stage with a child in his arms. I understand that this man delivers
\'lectures\'. He had better lecture to himself.\"

Trailokya sang:

> *Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness waves of ecstatic love arise:*
>
> *Rapture divine! Play of God\'s Bliss!*
>
> *Oh, how enthralling!*
>
> *Wondrous waves of the sweetness of God, ever new and ever
> enchanting,*
>
> *Rise on the surface, ever assuming*
>
> *Forms ever fresh.*
>
> *Then once more in the Great Communion all are merged, as the barrier
> walls*
>
> *Of time and space dissolve and vanish:*
>
> *Dance then, O mind!*
>
> *Dance in delight, with hands upraised, chanting Lord Hari\'s holy
> name.*

Sri Ramakrishna requested Trailokya to sing the song beginning, \"O
Mother, make me mad with Thy love\".

Trailokya sang:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason?*
>
> *Make me drunk with Thy love\'s Wine:*
>
> *O Thou who stealest Thy bhaktas\' hearts,*
>
> *Drown me deep in the Sea of Thy love!*
>
> *Here in this world, this madhouse of Thine*
>
> *Some laugh, some weep, some dance for joy:*
>
> *Jesus, Buddha, Moses, Gaurānga,*
>
> *All are drunk with the Wine of Thy love.*
>
> *O Mother, when shall I be blessed*
>
> *By joining their blissful company?*
>
> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 20**

RULES FOR HOUSEHOLDERS AND MONKS

> Sunday, March 9, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in his room at Dakshineswar with many
devotees. Among them were Mani Mallick, Mahendra Kaviraj, Balarām, M.,
Bhavanath, Rākhāl , Lātu, and Harish. The Master\'s injured arm was in a
splint. In spite of the injury he was constantly absorbed in samādhi or
instructing the devotees.

Mani Mallick and Bhavanath referred to the exhibition which was then
being held near the Asiatic Museum. They said: \"Many maharajas have
sent precious articles to the exhibition-gold couches and the like. It
is worth seeing.\"

MASTER (to the devotees, with a smile): \"Yes, you gain much by visiting
those things. You realize that those articles of gold and the other
things sent by maharajas are mere trash. That is a great gain in itself.
When I used to go to Calcutta with Hriday, he would show me the
Viceroy\'s palace and say: \'Look, uncle! There is the Viceroy\'s palace
with the big columns.\' The Mother revealed to me that they were merely
clay bricks laid one on top of another.

**God and His splendour**

\"God and His splendour. God alone is real; the splendour has but a two
days existence. The magician and his magic. All become speechless with
wonder at the magic, but it is all unreal. The magician alone is real.
The rich man and his garden. People see only the garden; they should
look for its rich owner.\"

MANI MALLICK (to the Master): \"What a big electric light they have at
the exhibition! It makes us think how great He must be who has made such
an electric light.\"

**God Himself has become everything**

MASTER. (to Mani): \"But according to one view it is He Himself who has
become everything. Even those who say that are He. It is Satchidananda
Itself that has become all-the Creator, māyā, the universe, and living
beings.\"

The conversation turned to the museum.

**Influence of company**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"I visited the museum once. I was shown
fossils. A whole animal has become stone! Just see what an effect has
been produced by company! Likewise, by constantly living in the company
of a holy man one verily becomes holy.\"

MANI (smiling): \"Had you visited the exhibition only once, we could
receive instruction for ten or fifteen years.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"How so? You mean illustrations?\"

BALARĀM: \"No, you shouldn\'t go. Your arm won\'t heal if you go here
and there.\"

MASTER: \"I should like to have two pictures. One of a yogi seated
before a lighted log, and another of a yogi smoking hemp and the
charcoal blazing up as he pulls. Such pictures kindle my spiritual
consciousness, as an imitation fruit awakens the idea of a real one.

**Obstacles to Yoga**

\"The obstacle to yoga is \'woman and gold\'. Yoga is possible when the
mind becomes pure. The seat of the mind is between the eyebrows; but its
look is fixed on the navel and the organs of generation and evacuation,
that is to say, on \'woman and gold\'. But through spiritual discipline
the same mind looks upward.

**Spiritual discipline**

\"What are the spiritual disciplines that give the mind its upward
direction? One learns all this by constantly living in holy company. The
rishis of olden times lived either in solitude or in the company of holy
persons; therefore they could easily renounce \'woman and gold\' and
\'fix their minds on God. They had no fear nor did they mind the
criticism of others.

**Will-power needed for renunciation**

\"In order to be able to renounce, one must pray to God for the will
power to do so. One must immediately renounce what one feels to be
unreal. The rishis had this will-power. Through it they controlled the
sense-organs. If the tortoise once tucks in its limbs, you cannot make
it bring them out even by cutting it into four pieces.

**Master denounces hypocrisy**

\"The worldly man is a hypocrite. He cannot be guileless. He professes
to love God, but he is attracted by worldly objects. He doesn\'t give
God even a very small part of the love he feels for \'woman and gold\'.
But he says that he loves God. (To Mani Mallick) Give up hypocrisy.\"

MANI: \"Regarding whom, God or man?\"

MASTER: \"Regarding everything-man as well as God. One must not be a
hypocrite.

\"How guileless Bhavanath is! After his marriage he came to me and
asked, \'Why do I feel so much love for my wife?\' Alas, he is so
guileless!

\"Isn\'t it natural for a man to love his wife? This is due to the world
bewitching māyā of the Divine Mother of the Universe. A man feels about
his wife that he has no one else in the world so near and dear; that she
is his very own in life and death, here and hereafter.

\"Again, how much a man suffers for his wife! Still he believes that
there is no other relative so near. Look at the sad plight of a husband.
Perhaps he earns twenty rupees a month and is the father of three
children. He hasn\'t the means to feed them well. His roof leaks, but he
hasn\'t the wherewithal to repair it. He cannot afford to buy new books
for his son. He cannot invest his son with the sacred thread. He begs a
few pennies from his different friends.

**The ideal of a spiritual family**

\"But a wife endowed with spiritual wisdom is a real partner in life.
She greatly helps her husband to follow the religious path. After the
birth of one or two children they live like brother and sister. Both of
them are devotees of God-His servant and His handmaid. Their family is a
spiritual family. They are always happy with God and His devotees. They
know that God alone is their own, from everlasting to everlasting. They
are like the Pandava brothers; they do not forget God in happiness or in
sorrow.

\"The longing of the worldly-minded for God is momentary, like a drop of
water on a red-hot frying-pan. The water hisses and dries up in an
instant. The attention of the worldly-minded is directed to the
enjoyment of worldly pleasure. Therefore they do not feel yearning and
restlessness for God.

**Different forms of austerity**

\"People may observe the ekadasi in three ways. First, the \'waterless\'
ekadasi-they are not permitted to drink even a drop of water. Likewise,
an all-renouncing religious mendicant completely gives up all forms of
enjoyment. Second, while observing the ekadasi they take milk and
sandesh. Likewise, a householder devotee keeps in his house simple
objects of enjoyment. Third, while observing the ekadasi they eat luchi
and chakka. They eat their fill. They keep a couple of loaves soaking in
milk, which they will eat later on

\"A man practises spiritual discipline, but his mind is on \'woman and
gold\'-it is turned toward enjoyment.

Therefore, in his case, the spiritual discipline does not produce the
right result.

\"Hazra used to practise much japa and austerity here. But in the
country he has his wife, children, and land. Therefore along with his
Spiritual discipline he carried on the business of a broker. Such people
cannot be true to their word. One moment they say they will give up
fish, but the next moment they break their vow.

\"Is there anything that a man will not do for money? He will even
compel a brahmin or a holy man to carry a load.

\"In my room sweets would turn bad; still I could not give them away to
the worldly-minded. I could accept dirty water from others, but not even
touch the jar of a worldly person.

\"At the sight of rich people Hazra would call them to him. He would
give them long lectures. He would say to them: \'You see Rākhāl and the
other youngsters. They do not practise any spiritual discipline. They
simply wander about merrily.\'

\"A man may live in a mountain cave, smear his body with ashes, observe
fasts; and practise austere discipline; but if his mind dwells on
worldly objects, on \'woman and gold\', I say, \'Shame on him!\' But I
say that a man is blessed indeed who eats, drinks, and roams about, but
who keeps his mind free from \'woman and gold\'.

(Pointing to Mani Mallick) \"There is no picture of a holy man at his
house. Divine feeling is awakened through such pictures.\"

MANILAL: \"Yes, there is. In one room there is a picture of a pious
Christian woman engaged in prayer. There is another picture in which a
man holds to the Hill of Faith; below is an ocean of immeasurable depth.
If he gives up his hold on faith, he will drop into the bottomless
water. There is still a third picture. Several virgins are keeping
vigil, feeding their lamps with oil in expectation of the Bridegroom. A
sleeping virgin is by their side. She will not behold the Bridegroom
when He arrives. God is described here as the Bridegroom.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"That\'s very nice.\"

MANILAL: \"I have other pictures too-one of the \'Tree of Faith\' and
another of \'Sin and Virtue\'.\"

MASTER (to Bhavanath): \"Those are good pictures. Go to his house and
see them.\"

The Master remained silent a few minutes.

**Sin and repentance**

MASTER: \"Now and then I reflect on these ideas and find that I do not
like them. In the beginning of spiritual life a man should think about
sin and how to get rid of it. But when, through the grace of God,
devotion and ecstatic love are awakened in his heart, then he altogether
forgets virtue and sin. Then he leaves the scriptures and their
injunctions far behind. Thoughts of repentance and penance do not bother
him at all.

\"It is like going to your destination along a winding river. This
requires great effort and a long time. But when there is a flood all
around, then you can go straight to your destination in a short time.
Then you find the land lying under water deep as a bamboo pole.

\"In the beginning of spiritual life one goes by a roundabout way. One
has to suffer a great deal. But the path becomes very easy when ecstatic
love is awakened in the heart. It is like going over the paddy-field
after the harvest is over. You may then walk in any direction. Before
the harvest you had to go along the winding balk, but now you can walk
in any direction. There may be stubble in the field, but you will not be
hurt by it if you walk with your shoes on. Just so, an aspirant does not
suffer if he has discrimination, dispassion, and faith in the guru\'s
words.\"

**Rules for concentration**

MANILAL (to the Master): \"Well, what is the rule for concentration?
Where should one concentrate?\"

MASTER: \"The heart is a splendid place. One can meditate there or in
the Sahasrara. These are rules for meditation given in the scriptures.
But you may meditate wherever you like. Every place is filled with
Brahman-Consciousness. Is there any place where It does not exist?
Narayana, in Vali\'s presence, covered with two steps the heavens, the
earth, and the interspaces. Is there then any place left uncovered by
God? A dirty place is as holy as the bank of the Ganges. It is said that
the whole creation is the Virat, the Universal Form of God.

**Two forms of meditation**

\"There are two kinds of meditation, one on the formless God and the
other on God with form. But meditation on the formless God is extremely
difficult. In that meditation you must wipe out all that you see or
hear. You contemplate only the nature of your Inner Self. Meditating on
His Inner Self, Shiva dances about. He exclaims, \'What am I! What am
I!\' This is called the Shiva yoga\'. While practising this form of
meditation, one directs one\'s look to the forehead. It is meditation on
the nature of one\'s Inner Self after negating the world, following the
Vedantic method of \'Neti, neti\'.

\"There is another form of meditation, known as the \'Vishnu yoga\', The
eyes are fixed on the tip of the nose. Half the look is directed inward
and the other half outward. This is how one meditates on God with form.
Sometimes Shiva meditates on God with form, and dances. At that time he
exclaims, \'Rāma! Rāma!\' and dances about.\"

**Meaning of Om**

Sri Ramakrishna then explained the sacred Word \"Om\" and the true
Knowledge of Brahman and the state of mind after the attainment of
Brahmajnana.

MASTER: \"The sound Om is Brahman. The rishis and sages practised
austerity to realize that Sound-Brahman.

After attaining perfection one hears the sound of this eternal Word
rising spontaneously from the navel.

\"\'What will you gain\', some sages ask, \'by merely hearing this
sound?\' You hear the roar of the ocean from a distance. By following
the roar you can reach the ocean. As long as there is the roar, there
must also be the ocean. By following the trail of Om you attain Brahman,
of which the Word is the symbol. That Brahman has been described by the
Vedas as the ultimate goal. But such vision is not possible as long as
you are conscious of your ego. A man realizes Brahman only when he feels
neither \'I\' nor \'you\', neither \'one\' nor \'many\'.

\"Think of the sun and of ten jars filled with water. The sun is
reflected in each jar. At first you see one real sun and ten reflected
ones. If you break nine of the jars, there will remain only the real sun
and one reflection. Each jar represents a jiva. Following the reflection
one can find the real sun. Through the individual soul one can reach the
Supreme Soul. Through spiritual discipline the individual soul can get
the vision of the Supreme Soul. What remains when the last jar is broken
cannot be described.

**Ignorance, knowledge, and Supreme Wisdom**

\"The jiva at first remains in a state of ignorance. He is not conscious
of God, but of the multiplicity. He sees many things around him. On
attaining Knowledge he becomes conscious that God dwells in all beings.
Suppose a man has a thorn in the sole of his foot. He gets another thorn
and takes out the first one. In other words, he removes the thorn of
ajnāna, ignorance, by means of the thorn of jnāna, knowledge. But on
attaining vijnāna, he discards both thorns, knowledge and ignorance.
Then he talks intimately with God day and night. It is no mere vision of
God.

\"He who has merely heard of milk is \'ignorant\'. He who has seen milk
has \'knowledge\'. But he who has drunk milk and been strengthened by it
has attained vijnāna.\"

Thus the Master described his own state of mind to the devotees. He was
indeed a vijnāni.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"There is a difference between, a *Sādhu*
endowed with jnāna and one endowed with vijnāna. The Jnāni *Sādhu* has a
certain way of sitting. He twirls his moustache and asks the visitor,
\'Well, sir! Have you any question to ask?\' But the man who always sees
God and talks to Him intimately has an altogether different nature. He
is sometimes like an inert thing, sometimes like a ghoul, sometimes like
a child, and sometimes like a madman.

\"When he is in *samādhi*, he becomes unconscious of the outer world and
appears inert. He sees everything to be full of Brahman-Consciousness;
therefore he behaves like a ghoul. He is not conscious of the holy and
the unholy. He does not observe any formal purity. To him everything is
Brahman. He is not aware of filth as such. Even rice and other cooked
food after a few days become like filth.

\"Again, he is like a madman. People notice his ways and actions and
think of him as insane. Or sometimes he is like a child-no bondage, no
shame, no hatred, no hesitation, or the like.

\"One reaches this state of mind after having the vision of God. When a
boat passes by a magnetic hill, its screws and nails become loose and
drop out. Lust, anger, and the other passions cannot exist after the
vision of God.

\"Once a thunderbolt struck the Kāli temple. I noticed that it flattened
the points of the screws.

\"It is no longer possible for the man who has seen God to beget
children and perpetuate the creation. When a grain of paddy is sown it
grows into a plant; but a grain of boiled paddy does not germinate.

\"He who has seen God retains his \'I\' only in name.

like the mark left on the coconut tree by its branch.

No evil can be done by that \'I\'. It is a mere appearance, The branch
has fallen off. Only the mark remains.

**The two egos**

\"I said to Keshab Sen, \'Give up the ego that makes you feel, \"I am
the doer; I am teaching people.\" \' Keshab said to me, \'Sir, then I
cannot keep the organization.\' Thereupon I said to him, \'Give up the
\"wicked ego\".\' One doesn\'t have to renounce the ego that makes one
feel, \'I am the servant of God; I am His devotee.\' One doesn\'t
develop the \'divine ego\' as long as one retains the \'wicked ego\'. If
a man is in charge of the store-room, the master of the house doesn\'t
feel responsible for it.

**God\'s manifestation through man**

(To the devotees) \"You see, my nature is changing on account of this
injury to my arm. It is being revealed to me that there is a greater
manifestation of God in man than in other created beings. God is telling
me, as it were: \'I dwell in men. Be merry with men.\' Among men God
manifests Himself in a still greater degree in pure-souled devotees.
That is why I feel great longing for Narendra, Rākhāl , and other such
youngsters.

\"One often sees small holes along the edge of a lake. Fish and crabs
accumulate there. Just so, there is a greater accumulation of divinity
in man. It is said that man is greater than the salagram. Man is
Narayana Himself. If God can manifest Himself through an image, then why
not through man also?

\"God is born as man for the purpose of sporting as man. Rāma, Krishna,
and Chaitanya are examples. By meditating on an incarnation of God one
meditates on God Himself.\"

Bhagavan Das, a Brahmo devotee, arrived.

**The Eternal Religion**

MASTER (to Bhagavan Das): \"The Eternal Religion, the religion of the
rishis, has been in existence from time out of mind and will exist
eternally. There exist in this Sanatana Dharma all forms of
worship-worship of God with form and worship of the Impersonal Deity as
well. It contains all paths-the path of knowledge, the path of devotion,
and so on. Other forms of religion, the modern cults, will remain for a
few days and then disappear.\"

**March 23, 1884**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room after his midday meal, with
Rākhāl , Ram, and some other devotees.

He was not quite well. The injured arm was still bandaged.

But in spite of his illness, his room was a veritable mart of joy and he
the centre of it. Devotees thronged there daily to see the Master.
Spiritual talk went on incessantly, and, the very air of the room
vibrated with bliss. Sometimes the Master would sing the name and
glories of God, and sometimes he would go into *samādhi*, the devotees
being amazed at the ease with which the Master freed himself from the
consciousness of the body.

RAM: \"There is talk of Narendra\'s marrying Mr. R. Mitra\'s daughter.
Narendra has been offered a large dowry.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, Narendra may thus become a leader of society or
something like that. He will be an outstanding man, whatever career he
follows.\"

The Master did not much encourage the conversation about Narendra.

MASTER (to Ram): \"Well, can you tell me why I become so impatient when
I am ill? Sometimes I ask this man and sometimes that man how I may be
cured. You see, one must either believe everyone or no one at all.

\"It is God Himself who has become the physicians. Therefore one must
believe all of them. But one cannot have faith in them if one thinks of
them as mere men.

\"Sambhu was fearfully delirious. Dr. Sarvadhikari said that the
delirium was due to the strong medicine. Haladhāri asked the doctor to
feel his pulse. The doctor said: \'Let me see your eyes. Oh, it is an
enlargement of the spleen!\' Haladhāri said he had nothing of the sort.
But Dr. Madhu gives good medicine.\"

RAM: \"The medicine by itself does no good, though it greatly helps
nature.\"

MASTER: \"If that is so, why does opium cause constipation?\"

Ram referred to Keshab Sen\'s death.

RAM: \"You were quite right. You said that a gardener uncovers the roots
of a good rose-plant so that it may absorb the dew and grow stronger and
healthier. The words of a holy man have been fulfilled.\"

MASTER: \"I don\'t know about that. I wasn\'t calculating when I said
it. It is you who say that.\"

RAM: \"The Brahmos have published something about you in their
magazine.\"

MASTER: \"Published about me? Why? Why should they write now? I eat and
drink and make merry. I don\'t know anything else.

**Man teaches by God\'s power**

\"I once asked Keshab, \'Why have you written about me?\' He said that
it would bring people here. But man cannot teach by his own power. One
cannot conquer ignorance without the power of God.

\"At one time two men were engaged to wrestle. One of them was Hanuman
Singh and the other a Mussalman from the Punjab. The Mussalman was a
strong, stout man. He had eaten lustily of butter and meat for fifteen
days before the day of the wrestling-match, and even on that day. All
thought he would be the victor. Hanuman Singh, on the other hand, clad
in a dirty cloth, had eaten sparingly for some days before the day of
the match and devoted himself to repeating the holy name of Mahavir. On
the day of the match he observed a complete fast. All thought that he
would surely be defeated. But it was he who won, while the man who

had feasted for fifteen days lost the fight.

\"What is the use of printing and advertising? He who teaches men gets
his power from God. None but a man of renunciation can teach others. I
am the greatest of all fools!\" (All laugh.)

A DEVOTEE: \"Then how is it that the Vedas and the Vedānta, and many
things besides, come out of your mouth?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"During my boyhood I could understand what the
*Sādhus* read at the Lahas\' house at Kamarpukur, although I would miss
a little here and there. If a pundit speaks to me in Sanskrit I can
follow him, but I cannot speak it myself.

\"To realize God is the one goal of life. While aiming his arrow at the
mark, Arjuna said, \'I see only the eye of the bird and nothing else-not
the kings, not the trees, not even the bird itself.\'

\"The realization of God is enough for me. What does it matter if I
don\'t know Sanskrit?

\"The grace of God falls alike on all His children, learned and
illiterate―whoever longs for Him. The father has the same love for all
his children. Suppose a father has five children. One calls him
\'Baba\', some \'Ba\', and some \'Pa\'. These last cannot pronounce the
whole word. Does the father love those who address him as \'Baba\' more
than those who call him \'Pa\'? The father knows that these last are
simply too young to say \'Baba\' correctly.

\"Since this injury to my arm a change has been coming over my mind. I
have been feeling much inclined to the Naralila. It is God Himself who
plays about as human beings. If God can be worshipped through a clay
image, then why not through a man?

\"Once a merchant was shipwrecked. He floated to the shore of Ceylon,
where Bibhishana was the king of the monsters. Bibhishana ordered his
servants to bring the merchant to him. At the sight of him Bibhishana
was overwhelmed with joy and said: \'Ah! He looks like my Rāma. The same
human form!\' He adorned the merchant with robes and jewels, and
worshipped him. When I first heard this story, I felt such joy that I
cannot describe it.

\"Vaishnavcharan said to me, \'If a person looks on his beloved as his
Ishta, he finds it very easy to direct his mind to God.\' The men and
women of a particular sect at Syambazar, near Kamarpukur, say to each
other, \'Whom do you love?\' \'I love so-and-so.\' \'Then know him to be
your God.\' When I heard this, I said to them: \'That is not my way. I
look on all women as my mother.\' I found out that they talked big but
led immoral lives. The women then asked me if they would have salvation.
\'Yes,\' I said, \'if you are absolutely faithful to one man and look on
him as your God. But you cannot be liberated if you live with five
men.\' \"

RAM: \"I understand that Kedār Babu has recently visited the
Kartabhajas\' place.\"

MASTER: \"He gathers honey from various flowers. (To Ram, Nityagopal,
and the others) If a devotee believes one hundred per cent that his
Chosen Ideal is God, then he attains God and sees Him.

\"People of bygone generations had tremendous faith. What faith
Haladhāri\'s father had! Once he was on the way to his daughter\'s house
when he noticed some beautiful flowers and vilwa-leaves. He gathered
them for the worship of the Family Deity and walked back five or six
miles to his own house.

\"Once a theatrical troupe in the village was enacting the life of Rāma.
When Kaikeyi asked Rāma to go into exile in the forest, Haladhāri\'s
father, who had been watching the performance, sprang up. He went to the
actor who played Kaikeyi, crying out, \'You wretch!\', and was about to
burn the actor\'s face with a torch. He was a very pious man. After
finishing his ablutions he would stand in the water and meditate on the
Deity, reciting the invocation: \'I meditate on Thee, of red hue and
four faces\', while tears streamed down his cheeks.

\"When my father walked along the lanes of the village wearing his
wooden sandals, the shopkeepers would stand up out of respect and say,
\'there he comes!\' When he bathed in the Haldārpukur, the villagers
would not have the courage to get into the water. Before bathing they
would inquire if he had finished his bath.

\"When my father chanted the name of Raghuvir, his chest would turn
crimson. This also happened to me. When I saw the cows at Vrindāvan
returning from the pasture, I was transported into a divine mood and my
body became red.

\"Very strong was the faith of the people in those days. One hears that
God used to dance then, taking the form of Kāli, while the devotee
clapped his hands keeping time.\"

A hathayogi was staying in the hut at the Panchavati. Ramprasanna, the
son of Krishnakishore of Ariadāhā, and several other men had become his
devotees: The yogi needed twenty-five rupees a month for his milk and
opium; so Ramprasanna had requested Sri Ramakrishna to speak to his
devotees about the yogi and get some money. The Master said to several
devotees: \"A hathayogi has come to the Panchavati. Go and visit him.
See what sort of man he is.\"

1.  young man of twenty-seven or twenty-eight, known as Thakur Dada,
    entered the room with a few friends and saluted the Master. He lived
    at Baranagore and was the son of a brahmin pundit. He was practising
    the kathakata in order to earn money to meet his family\'s expenses.
    At one time he had been seized with the spirit of renunciation and
    had gone away from his family. Even now he practised spiritual
    discipline at home.

MASTER: \"Have you come on foot? Where do you live?\"

DADA: \"Yes, sir, I have walked from home. I live at Baranagore.\"

MASTER: \"Have you come here for any particular purpose?\"

DADA: \"I have come here to visit you. I pray to God. But why do I
suffer now and then from worries? For a few days I feel very happy. Why
do I feel restless afterwards?\"

MASTER: \"I see. Things have not been fitted quite exactly. The machine
works smoothly if the mechanic fits the cogs of the wheels correctly. In
your case there is an obstruction somewhere.\"

DADA: \"Yes, sir. That must be so.\"

MASTER: \"Are you initiated?\"

DADA: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Do you have faith in your mantra?\"

A friend of Thākur Dādā said that the latter could sing well. The Master
asked him to sing.

Thākur Dādā sang:

> *I shall become a yogi and dwell in Love\'s mountain cave;*
>
> *I shall be lost in yoga beside the Fountain-head of Bliss.*
>
> *I shall appease my hunger for Knowledge with the fruit of Truth;*
>
> *I shall worship the feet of God with the flower of Dispassion.*
>
> *I shall not seek a well to slake the burning thirst of my heart,*
>
> *But I shall draw the water of Peace into the jar of my soul.*
>
> *Drinking the glorious Nectar of Thy blessed Lotus Feet,*
>
> *I shall both laugh and dance and weep and sing on the heights of
> Joy.*

MASTER: \"Ah, what a nice song! *\'Fountain-head of Bliss\'!* \'Fruit of
Truth\'! *\'Laugh and dance and weep and sing\'!*

Your song tastes very sweet to me.Why should you worry?

\"Pleasure and pain are inevitable in the life of the world. One suffers
now and then from a little worry and trouble. A man living in a room
full of soot cannot avoid being a little stained.\"

DĀDĀ: \"Please tell me what I should do now.\"

MASTER: \"Chant the name of Hari morning and evening, clapping your
hands. Come once more when my arm is healed a bit.\"

Mahimacharan entered the room and saluted the Master. Sri Ramakrishna
said to him: \"Ah! He has sung a nice song. Please sing it again.\"
Thakur Dada repeated the song.

MASTER (to Mahima): \"Please recite that verse, the one about devotion
to Hari\"

Mahimacharan recited, quoting from the Nārada Pancharatra:

> *What need is there of penance if God is worshipped with love?*
>
> *What is the use of penance if God is not worshipped with love?*
>
> *What need is there of penance if God is seen within and without?*
>
> *What is the use of penance if God is not seen within and without?*

MASTER: \"Recite that part also-\'Obtain from Him the love of God\'.\"

Mahima recited:

> *O Brahman! O my child! Cease from practising further penances.*
>
> *Hasten to Sankara, the Ocean of Heavenly Wisdom;*
>
> *Obtain from Him the love of God, the pure love praised by devotees,*
>
> *Which snaps in twain the shackles that bind you to the world.*

MASTER: \"Yes, Sankara will bestow the love of God.\"

MAHIMA: \"One who is free from bondage is the eternal Shiva.\"

MASTER: \"Shame, hatred, fear, hesitation-these are the shackles. What
do you say?\"

MAHIMA: \"Yes, sir. And also the desire to conceal, and shrinking before
praise.\"

**Signs of Knowledge**

MASTER: \"There are two signs of knowledge. First, an unshakable buddhi.
No matter how many sorrows, afflictions, dangers, and obstacles one may
be faced with, one\'s mind does not undergo any change. It is like the
blacksmith\'s anvil, which receives constant blows from the hammer and
still remains unshaken. And second, manliness-very strong grit. If lust
and anger injure a man, he must renounce them once for all. If a
tortoise once tucks in its limbs, it won\'t put them out again though
you may cut it into four pieces.

**Two kinds of renunciation**

(To Thakur Dada and the others) There are two kinds of renunciation:
intense and feeble. Feeble renunciation is a slow process; one moves in
a slow rhythm. Intense renunciation is like the sharp edge of a razor.
It cuts the bondage of māyā easily and at once.

\"One farmer labours for days to bring water from the lake to his field.
But his efforts are futile because he has no grit. Another farmer, after
labouring for two or three days, takes a vow and says, \'I will bring
water into my field today, and not till then will I go home.\' He puts
aside all thought of his bath or his meal. He labours the whole day and
feels great joy when in the evening he finds water entering his field
with a murmuring

sound. Then he goes home and says to his wife: \'Now give me some oil. I
shall take my bath.\' After finishing his bath and his meal he lies down
to sleep with a peaceful mind.

\"A certain woman said to her husband: \'So-and-so has developed a
spirit of great dispassion for the world, but I don\'t see anything of
the sort in you. He has sixteen wives. He is giving them up one by
one.\' The husband, with a towel in his shoulder, was going to the lake
for his bath. He said to his wife: \'You are crazy! He won\'t be able to
give up the world. Is it ever possible to renounce bit by bit? I can
renounce. Look! Here I go.\' He didn\'t stop even to settle his
household affairs. He left home just as he was, the towel on his
shoulder, and went away. That is intense renunciation.

\"There is another kind of renunciation, called \'Markata Vairāgya\',
\'monkey renunciation\'. A man, harrowed by distress at home, puts on an
ochre robe and goes away to Benares. For many days he does not send home
any news of himself. Then he writes to his people: \'Don\'t be worried
about me. I have got a job here.\'

\"There is always trouble in family life. The wife may be disobedient.
Perhaps the husband earns only twenty rupees a month. He hasn\'t the
means to perform the \'rice-eating ceremony\' for his baby. He cannot
educate his son. The house is dilapidated. The roof leaks and he hasn\'t
the money to repair it.

**Advantage of a householder\'s life**

\"Therefore when the youngsters come here I ask them whether they have
anyone at home. (To Mahima) Why should householders renounce the world?
What great troubles the wandering monks pass through! The wife of a
certain man said to him: \'You want to renounce the world? Why? You will
have to beg morsels from eight different homes. But here you get all
your food at one place. Isn\'t that nice?\'

\"Wandering monks, while searching for a sadavrata, may have to go six
miles out of their way. I have seen them travelling along the regular
road after their pilgrimage to Puri and making a detour to find an
eating-place.

\"You are leading a householder\'s life. That is very good. It is like
fighting from a fort. There are many disadvantages in fighting in an
open field. So many dangers, too. Bullets may hit you.

\"But one should spend some time in solitude and attain Knowledge. Then
one can lead the life of a householder. Janaka lived in the world after
attaining Knowledge. When you have gained it, you may live anywhere.
Then nothing matters.\"

MAHlMA: \"Sir, why does a man become deluded by worldly objects?\"

MASTER: \"It is because he lives in their midst without having realized
God. Man never succumbs to delusion after he has realized God. The moth
no longer enjoys darkness if it has once seen the light.

**Practice of continence**

\"To be able to realize God, one must practise absolute continence.
Sages like Sukadeva are examples of an urdhvareta. Their chastity was
absolutely unbroken. There is another class, who previously have had
discharges of semen but who later on have controlled them. A man
controlling the seminal fluid for twelve years develops a special power.
He grows a new inner nerve called the nerve of memory. Through that
nerve he remembers all, he understands all.

\"Loss of semen impairs the strength. But it does not injure one if one
loses it in a dream. That semen one gets from food. What remains after
nocturnal discharge is enough. But one must not know a woman.

\"The semen that remains after nocturnal discharge is very \'refined\'.
The Lahas kept jars of molasses in their house. Every jar had a hole in
it. After a year they found that the molasses had crystallized like
sugar candy. The unnecessary watery part had leaked out through the
hole.

**Sannyasi\'s absolute self-control**

\"A sannyasi must absolutely renounce woman. You are already involved;
but that doesn\'t matter.

\"A sannyasi must not look even at the picture of a woman. But this is
too difficult for an ordinary man. Sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, ni are the
seven notes of the scale. It is not possible to keep your voice on
\'ni\' a long time.

\"To lose semen is extremely harmful for a sannyasi. Therefore he must
live so carefully that he will not have to see the form of a woman. He
must keep himself away from a woman even if she is a devotee of God. It
is injurious for him to look even at the picture of a woman. He will
lose semen in a dream, if not in the waking state.

\"A sannyasi may have control over his senses, but to set an example to
mankind he should not talk with women. He must not talk to one very
long, even if she is a devotee of God. .

\"Living as a sannyasi is like observing the ekadasi without drinking
even a drop of water. There are two other ways of observing the day. You
may eat fruit or take luchi. and curry. With the luchi and curry you may
also take slices of bread soaked in milk. (All laugh.)

(Smiling) \"Absolute fasting is not possible for you.

\"Once I saw Krishnakishore eating luchi and curry on an ekadasi day. I
said to Hriday, \'Hridu, I want to observe Krishnakishore\'s ekadasi!\'
(All laugh.) And so I did one day. I ate my fill. The next day I had to
fast.\" (Laughter.)

The devotees who had gone to the Panchavati to visit the hathayogi came
back.

MASTER (addressing them): \"Well, what do you think of him? I dare say
you have measured him with your own tape.\"

Sri Ramakrishna saw that very few of the devotees were willing to give
money to the hathayogi.

MASTER: \"You don\'t like a *Sādhu* if you have to give him money.
Rajendra Mitra draws a salary of eight hundred rupees a month. He had
been to Allahabad to see the kumbhamela. I asked him, \'Well, what kind
of *Sādhus* did you see at the fair?\' Rajendra said: \'I didn\'t find
any very great *Sādhu* there. I noticed one, it is true. But even he
accepted money.\'

\"I say to myself, \'If no one gives money to a *Sādhu*, then how will
he feed himself?\' There is no collection plate here; therefore all
come. And I say to myself: \'Alas! They love their money. Let them have
it.\' \"

The Master rested awhile. A devotee sat on the end of the small couch
and gently stroked his feet. The Master said to him softly: \"That which
is formless again has form. One should believe in the forms of God also.
By meditating on Kāli the aspirant realizes God as Kāli. Next he finds
that the form merges in the Indivisible Absolute. That which is the
Indivisible Satchidananda is verily Kāli.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the semicircular porch west of his room,
talking with Mahima and other devotees about the hathayogi. The talk
drifted to Ramprasanna, the son of Krishnakishore. The Master was fond
of the young man.

MASTER: \"Ramprasanna roams about aimlessly. The other day he came here
and sat in the room, but he did not speak a word. He pressed his
nostrils with his fingers, practising pranayama. I offered him something
to eat, but he wouldn\'t take it. On another occasion I had asked him to
sit by me. He squatted on the floor placing one leg upon the other. He
was rather discourteous to Captain. I weep at his mother\'s suffering.

(To Mahima) \"Ramprasanna asked me to speak to you about the hathayogi.
The yogi\'s daily expenses are six

and a half *ānnās*. But he won\'t tell you about it himself.\"

MAHIMA: \"Who will listen to him even if he does?\"

Mani Sen of Panihati entered the room with several friends, one of whom
was a physician. Mani asked the Master about his injured arm. The doctor
did not approve of the medicine prescribed by Pratap Mazumdar. The
Master said to him: \"Why should you say that? Pratap is no fool. \"

Suddenly Lātu cried out, \"Oh! The medicine bottle has dropped and
broken.\"

It was not yet dusk. The Master, seated on the couch, was talking to M.
Mahimacharan was on the semicircular porch engaged in a loud discussion
of the scriptures with the physician friend of Mani Sen. Sri Ramakrishna
heard it and with a smile said to M.: \"There! He is delivering himself.
That is the characteristic of rajas. It stimulates the desire to
\'lecture\' and to show off one\'s scholarship. But sattva makes one
introspective. It makes one hide one\'s virtues. But I must say that
Mahima is a grand person. He takes such delight in spiritual talk.\"

Adhar entered the room, saluted the Master, and sat by M.\'s side. He
had not come for the past few days.

MASTER: \"Hello! Why haven\'t you come all these days?\"

ADHAR: \"Sir, I have been busy with so many things. I had to attend a
conference of the school committee and various other meetings.\"

MASTER: \"So you completely lost yourself in schools and meetings and
forgot everything else?\"

ADHAR: \"Everything else was hidden away in a corner of my mind. How is
your arm?\"

MASTER: \"Just look. It is not yet healed. I have been taking medicine
prescribed by Pratap.\"

After a time the Master suddenly said to Adhar: \"Look here. All these
are unreal-meetings, school, office, and everything else. God alone is
the Substance, and all else is illusory. One should worship God with
one\'s whole mind.\"

Adhar sat without speaking a word.

MASTER: \"All else is illusory. This moment the body is and the next
moment it is not. One must make haste to worship God.

\"But you don\'t have to renounce everything. Live in the world the way
the tortoise does. The tortoise roams about in the water but keeps its
eggs on land. Its whole mind is on the eggs.

\"What a nice state of mind Captain has developed! He looks like a rishi
when he is seated to perform worship. He performs the *Ārati* with
lighted camphor and recites beautiful hymns. When he rises from his seat
after finishing the worship, his eyes are swollen from emotion, as if
bitten by ants. Besides, he always devotes himself to the study of the
sacred books, such as the Gitā and the Bhagavata. Once I used one or two
English words before him, and that made him angry. He said,
\'English-educated people are profane.\' \"

After a while Adhar said humbly to the Master: \"Sir, you haven\'t been
to our place for a long time. The drawing-room smells worldly and
everything else appears to be steeped in darkness.\"

The Master was deeply touched by these words of his devotee. He suddenly
stood up and blessed M. and Adhar in an ecstatic mood, touching their
heads and hearts. In a voice choked with love the Master said: \"I look
upon you as Narayana Himself. You are indeed my own.\"

Mahimacharan entered the room.

MASTER (to Mahima): \"What I said about aspirants practising continence
is true. Without chastity one cannot assimilate these teachings.

\"Once a man said to Chaitanya: \'You give the devotees so much
instruction. Why don\'t they make much progress?\' Chaitanya said:
\'They dissipate their powers in the company of women. That is why they
cannot assimilate spiritual instruction. If one keeps water in a leaky
jar, the water escapes little by little through the leak.\' \"

Mahima and the other devotees remained silent. After a time Mahima said,
\"Please pray to God for us that we may acquire the necessary
strength.\"

MASTER: \"Be on your guard even now. It is difficult, no doubt, to check
the torrent in the rainy season. But a great deal of water has gone out.
If you build the embankment now it will stand.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 21**

A DAY AT DAKSHINESWAR

> Saturday, April 5, 1884

IT WAS ABOUT EIGHT O\'CLOCK in the morning when M. arrived at the temple
garden and found Sri Ramakrishna seated on the small couch in his room.
A few devotees were sitting on the floor. The Master was talking to
them. Prankrishna Mukherji was there.

Prankrishna belonged to an aristocratic family and lived in the northern
part of Calcutta. He held a high post in an English business firm. He
was very much devoted to Sri Ramakrishna and, though a householder,
derived great pleasure from the study of Vedānta philosophy. He was a
frequent visitor at the temple garden. Once he invited the Master to his
house in Calcutta and held a religious festival. Every day, early in the
morning, he bathed in the holy water of the Ganges. Whenever it was
convenient, he would come to Dakshineswar in a hired country boat.

That morning he had hired a boat and invited M. to accompany him to
Dakshineswar. The boat had hardly left shore when the river became
choppy. M. had become frightened and begged Prankrishna to put him back
on land. In spite of assurances, M. had kept saying: \"You must put me
ashore. I shall walk to Dakshineswar.\" And so M. came on foot and found
Sri Ramakrishna talking to Prankrishna and the others.

**How the Lord Himself is deluded by His own māyā**

MASTER (to Prankrishna): \"But there is a greater manifestation of God
in man. You may ask, \'How is it possible for God to be incarnated as a
man who suffers from hunger, thirst, and the other traits of an embodied
being, and perhaps also from disease and grief?\' The reply is, \'Even
Brahman weeps, entrapped in the snare of the five elements.\'

\"Don\'t you know how Rāma had to weep, stricken with grief for Sita?
Further, it is said that the Lord incarnated Himself as a sow in order
to kill the demon Hiranyaksha. Hiranyaksha was eventually killed, but
God would not go back to His abode in heaven. He enjoyed His sow\'s
life. He had given birth to several young ones and was rather happy with
them. The gods said among themselves: \'What does this mean? The Lord
doesn\'t care to return to heaven!\' They all went to Shiva and laid the
matter before him. Shiva came down and urged the Lord to leave the sow
body and return to heaven. But the sow only suckled her young ones.
(Laughter.) Then Shiva destroyed the sow body with his trident, and the
Lord came out laughing aloud and went back to His own abode.\"

**The Anāhata sound**

PRANKRISHNA (to the Master): \"Sir, what is the *Anāhata* sound?\"

MASTER: \"It is a spontaneous sound constantly going on by itself. It is
the sound of the Pranava, Om. It originates in the Supreme Brahman and
is heard by yogis. People immersed in worldliness do not hear it. A

yogi alone knows that this sound originates both from his navel and from
the Supreme Brahman resting on the Ocean of Milk.\"

**Reincarnation**

PRANKRISHNA: \"Sir, what is the nature of the life after death?\"

MASTER: \"Keshab Sen also asked that question. As long as a man remains
ignorant, that is to say, as long as he has not realized God, so long
will, he be born. But after attaining Knowledge he will not have to come
back to this earth or to any other plane of existence.

\"The potter puts his pots in the sun to dry. Haven\'t you noticed that
among them there are both baked and unbaked ones? When a cow happens to
walk over them, some of the pots get broken to pieces. The broken pots
that are already baked, the potter throws away, since they are of no
more use to him. But the soft ones, though broken, he gathers up. He
makes them into a lump and out of this forms new pots. In the same way,
so long as a man has not realized God, he will have to come back to the
Potter\'s hand, that is, he will have to be born again and again.

\"What is the use of sowing a boiled paddy grain? It will never bring
forth a shoot. Likewise, if a man is boiled in the fire of Knowledge, he
will not be used for new creation. He is liberated.

**The \"ego of Devotion\"**

\"According to the Puranas, the bhakta and the Bhagavan are two separate
entities. \'I\' am one and \'You\' are another. The body is a plate, as
it were, containing the water of mind, intelligence, and ego. Brahman is
like the sun. It is reflected in the water. Therefore the devotee sees
the divine form.

**The \"ego of Knowledge\"**

\"According to the Vedānta, Brahman alone is real and all else is māyā,
dreamlike and unsubstantial. The ego, like a stick, lies across the
Ocean of Satchidananda. (To M.) Listen to what I am saying. When this
ego is taken away, there remains only one undivided Ocean of
Satchidananda. But as long as the stick of ego remains, there is an
appearance of two: here is one part of the water and there another part.
Attaining the Knowledge of Brahman one is established in *samādhi*. Then
the ego is effaced.

\"But Sankaracharya retained the \'ego of Knowledge\' in order to teach
men.

**The signs of a Jnāni**

(To Prankrishna) But there are signs that distinguish the man of
Knowledge. Some people think they have Knowledge. What are the
characteristics of Knowledge? A Jnāni cannot injure anybody. He becomes
like a child. If a steel sword touches the philosopher\'s stone, it is
transformed into gold. Gold can never cut. It may seem from the outside
that a Jnāni also has anger or egotism, but in reality he has no such
thing.

**The ego of a Jnāni**

\"From a distance a burnt string lying on the ground may look like a
real one; but if you come near and blow at it, it disappears altogether.
The anger and egotism of a Jnāni are mere appearances; they are not
real.

\"A child has no attachment. He makes a play house, and if anyone
touches it, he will jump about and cry. The next moment he himself will
break it. This moment he may be very attached to his cloth. He says:
\'My daddy has given it to me. I won\'t part with it.\' But the next
moment you can cajole him away from it with a toy. He will go away with
you, leaving the cloth behind.

\"These are the characteristics of a Jnāni. Perhaps he has many luxuries
at home―couch, chairs, paintings, and equipage. But any day he may leave
all these and go off to Benares.

**Jnāni looks on the world as illusory**

\"According to Vedānta the waking state, too, is unreal. Once a
wood-cutter lay dreaming, when someone woke him up. Greatly annoyed, he
said: \'Why have you disturbed my sleep? I was dreaming that I was a
king and the father of seven children. The princes were becoming well
versed in letters and military arts. I was secure on my throne and ruled
over my subjects. Why have you demolished my world of joy?\' \'But that
was a mere dream\', said the other man. \'Why should that bother you?\'
\'Fool!\' said the wood-cutter. \'You don\'t understand. My becoming a
king in the dream was just as real as is my being a wood-cutter. If
being a wood-cutter is real, then being a king in a dream is real
also.\' \"

**The state of a vijnāni**

Prankrishna always talked about jnāna. Was this why the Master described
the state of the Jnāni? Now he proceeded to describe the state of the
vijnāni.

MASTER: \"Jnāna is the realization of Self through the process of
\'Neti, neti\', \'Not this, not this\'. One goes into *samādhi* through
this process of elimination and realizes the Ātman.

\"But vijnāna means Knowledge with a greater fullness. Some have heard
of milk, some have seen milk, and some have drunk milk. He who has
merely heard of it is \'ignorant\'. He who has seen it is a Jnāni. But
he who has drunk it has vijnāna, that is to say, a fuller knowledge of
it. After having the vision of God one talks to Him as if He were an
intimate relative. That is vijnāna.

\"First of all you must discriminate, following the method of \'Neti,
neti\': \'He is not the five elements, nor the sense-organs, nor the
mind, nor the intelligence, nor the ego. He is beyond all these cosmic
principles.\' You want to climb to the roof; then you must eliminate and
leave behind all the steps one by one. The steps are by no means the
roof. But after reaching the roof you find that the steps are made of
the same materials―brick, lime, and brick-dust―as the roof. It is the
Supreme Brahman that has become the universe and its living beings and
the twenty-four cosmic principles. That which is Ātman has become the
five

elements. You may ask why the earth is so hard, if it has come out of
Ātman? All is possible through the will of God. Don\'t you see that bone
and flesh are made from blood and semen? How hard \'sea-foam\' becomes!

\"After attaining vijnāna one can live in the world as well. Then one
clearly realizes that God Himself has become the universe and all living
beings, that He is not outside the world.

(To Prankrishna) \"The fact is that one must have the \'spiritual eye\'.
You will develop that eye as soon as your mind becomes pure. Take for
instance the Kumari Puja. I worshipped a virgin. The girl, to be sure,
had all her human imperfections; still I regarded her as the Divine
Mother Herself.

\"On one side is the wife and on the other the son. Love is bestowed on
both, but in different ways. Therefore it comes to this, that everything
depends upon the mind. The pure mind acquires a new attitude. Through
that mind one sees God in this world. Therefore one needs spiritual
discipline.

\"Yes, spiritual discipline is necessary. You should know that a man
becomes easily attached to a woman. A woman naturally loves a man, and a
man also naturally loves a woman. Therefore both fall speedily from
their spiritual ideal. But it also must be said that there is a great
advantage in leading the life of a householder. In case of urgent
necessity a man may live with his wife.

(Smiling) \"Well, M., why are you smiling?\"

1.  (to himself): \"The Master makes this much allowance for
    house-holders since they cannot renounce everything. Is complete and
    absolute continence impossible for a householder?\"

The hathayogi who had been living in the Panchavati entered the room. He
was in the habit of taking milk and opium. He did not eat rice or other
food and had no money to buy the milk and opium. The Master had talked
with him in the Panchavati. The hathayogi had told Rākhāl to ask the
Master to make some provision for him, and Sri Ramakrishna had promised
to speak about it to the visitors from Calcutta.

HATHAYOGI (to the Master): \"What did you say to Rākhāl about me?\"

MASTER: \"I said that I would ask some rich visitors to help you. But
(to Prankrishna) you, perhaps, do not like these yogis?\"

Prankrishna remained silent. The hathayogi left the room and the
conversation went on.

**Master\'s adherence to truth**

MASTER (to Prankrishna and the others): \"If a man leads a
householder\'s life he must have unflagging devotion to truth. God can
be realized through truth alone. Formerly I was very particular about
telling the truth, though now my zeal has abated a little. If I said,
\'I shall bathe\', then I would get into the water of the Ganges, recite
the mantra, and sprinkle a little water over my head. But still there
would remain some doubt in me as to whether my bath was complete. Once I
went to Ram\'s house in Calcutta. I happened to say, \'I shall not take
any luchi.\' When I sat down for the meal I felt hungry. But I had said
I would not eat the luchi; so I had to fill my stomach with sweets. (All
laugh.)

\"But my zeal for truthfulness has abated a little now. Once I said I
would go to the pine-grove, but then I felt I had no particular urge to
go. What was to be done? I asked Ram about it. He said I didn\'t have to
go. Then I reasoned to myself: \'Well, everyone is Narayana. So Ram,
too, is Narayana. Why shouldn\'t I listen to him? The elephant is
Narayana no doubt; but the mahut is Narayana too. Since the mahut asked
me not to go near the elephant, then why shouldn\'t I obey him?\'
Through reasoning like this my zeal for truthfulness is slightly less
strong now than before.

\"I find a change, coming over me. Years ago Vaishnavcharan said to me,
\'One attains Perfect Knowledge when one sees God in man.\' Now I see
that it is God alone who is moving about in various forms: as a holy
man, as a cheat, as a villain. Therefore I say, \'Narayana in the guise
of the *Sādhu*, Narayana in the guise of the cheat, Narayana in the
guise of the villain, Narayana in the guise of the lecher.\'

\"Now my problem is how I can feed all of you. I want to feed everyone.
So I keep one at a time with me and feed him.\"

Prankrishna (looking at M. and smiling): \"A fine man, indeed! (To the
Master) He would not let us go till we put him ashore.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Why? What happened?\"

PRANKRISHNA: \"He was in our boat. Seeing that the river was slightly
rough, he insisted on being put ashore. (To M.) \'How did you come?\"

1.  (smiling): \"On foot.\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughed.

PRANKRISHNA (to the Master): \"Sir, I am thinking now of giving up my
work. One who is involved in activity cannot accomplish anything.
(Pointing to his companion) I am training him to do my work. After I
resign, he will relieve me. Work has become intolerable.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, work is very troublesome. It is now good for you to
meditate on God for a few days in solitude. No doubt you say that you
would like to give up your work. Captain said the same thing. Worldly
people talk that way; but they don\'t succeed in carrying out their
intention.

\"There are many pundits who speak words of wisdom. But they merely
talk; they don\'t live up to them. They are like vultures, which soar
very high but keep their gaze fixed on the charnel-pit. What I mean is
that these pundits are attached to the world, to \'woman and gold\'. If
I hear that pundits are practising discrimination and dispassion, then I
fear them. Otherwise I look upon them as mere goats and dogs.\"

Prankrishna saluted the Master and took his leave. He said to M., \"Will
you come with us?\"

1.  \"No, sir! Catch me going with you again! Good-bye.\"

Prankrishna laughed and said, \"I see you won\'t come in the boat.\"

+-------+------+-----+-----------------------------------------------+
| M.    | > li | > n | Panchavati and bathed in the river. Then he   |
| took  | ttle | ear | went to the temples of                        |
| a     | > st | >   |                                               |
|       | roll | the |                                               |
+-------+------+-----+-----------------------------------------------+
| Radha |      |     | himself before the images. He said to         |
| kanta |      |     | himself: \"I have heard that God              |
| and   |      |     |                                               |
| Kāli  |      |     |                                               |
| and   |      |     |                                               |
| prost |      |     |                                               |
| rated |      |     |                                               |
+-------+------+-----+-----------------------------------------------+
| has   | >    | >   | before these images? Is it because Sri        |
| no    | Then |  do | Ramakrishna believes in gods and              |
| form. | >    | > I |                                               |
|       |  why | >   |                                               |
|       |      | bow |                                               |
+-------+------+-----+-----------------------------------------------+

goddesses with form? I don\'t know anything about God, nor do I
understand Him. The Master believes in images; then why shouldn\'t I
too, who am so insignificant a creature, accept them?\"

1.  looked at the image of Kāli. He saw that the Divine Mother holds in
    Her two left hands a man\'s severed head and a sword. With Her two
    right hands She offers boons and reassurance to Her devotees. In one
    aspect She is terrible, and in another She is the ever affectionate
    Mother of Her devotees. The two ideals are harmonized in Her. She is
    compassionate and affectionate to Her devotees: to those who are
    submissive and helpless. It is also true that She is terrible, the
    \"Consort of Death\". She alone knows why She assumes two aspects at
    the same time.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  remembered this interpretation of Kāli given by the Master. He said
    to himself, \"I have heard that Keshab accepted Kāli in Sri
    Ramakrishna\'s presence. Is this, as Keshab used to say, the
    Goddess, all Spirit and Consciousness; manifesting Herself through a
    clay image?\"

M. returned to the Master\'s room and sat on the floor. Sri Ramakrishna
offered him some fruit and sweets to

eat. On account of trouble in the family, M. had recently rented a house
in another section of Calcutta near his school, his father and brothers
continuing to live in the ancestral home. But Sri Ramakrishna wanted him
to return to his own home, since a joint family affords many advantages
to one leading a religious life. Once or twice the Master had spoken to
M. to this effect, but unfortunately he had not yet returned to his
family. Sri Ramakrishna referred to the matter again.

MASTER: \"Tell me that you are going to your ancestral home.\"

1.  \"I can never persuade myself to enter that place.\"

MASTER: \"Why? Your father is making over the whole house.\"

1.  \"I have suffered too much there. I can by no means make up my mind
    to go there.\"

MASTER: \"Whom do you fear?\"

1.  \"All of them.\"

MASTER (seriously): \"Isn\'t that like your being afraid to get into the
boat?\"

The midday worship and the offering of food in the temples were over.
The bells, gongs, and symbals of the *Ārati* were being played, and the
temple garden was filled with joyful activity. Beggars, *Sādhus*, and
guests hurried to the guest-house for the noonday meal, carrying leaf or
metal plates in their hands. M. also took some of the *Prasad* from the
Kāli temple.

Sri Ramakrishna had been resting awhile after his meal when several
devotees, including Ram and Girindra, arrived. They sat down after
saluting the Master. The conversation turned to the New Dispensation
Church of Keshab Chandra Sen.

RAM (to the Master): \"Sir, I don\'t think the Navavidhan has done
people any good. If Keshab Babu himself was a genuine man, why are his
disciples left in such a plight? I don\'t think there is anything at all
in the New Dispensation. It is like rattling some potsherds in a room
and then locking it up. People may take it to be the jingling of coins,
but inside there is nothing but potsherds. Outsiders don\'t know what is
inside.\"

MASTER: \"There must be some substance in it. Otherwise, why should so
many people respect Keshab? Why isn\'t Shivanath honoured as much as
Keshab? Such a thing cannot happen without the will of God.

**A teacher must renounce the world**

\"But a man cannot act as an Āchārya without renouncing the world.
People won\'t respect him. They will say: \'Oh, he is a worldly man. He
secretly enjoys \"woman and gold\" himself but tells us that God alone
is real and the world unsubstantial, like a dream. \' Unless a man
renounces everything his teachings cannot be accepted by all. Some
worldly people may follow him. Keshab led the life of a householder;
hence his mind was directed to the world also. He had to safeguard his
family interests. That is why he left his affairs in such good order
though he delivered so many religious lectures. What an aristocratic man
he married his daughter to! Inside Keshab\'s inner apartments I saw many
big bedsteads. All these things gradually come to one who leads a
householder\'s life. The world is indeed a place for enjoyment.\"

RAM: \"Keshab Sen inherited those bedsteads when his ancestral property
was divided. And for Keshab to take part in the division of property!
Whatever you may say, sir, Vijay Babu told me that Keshab had said to
him, \'I am a partial manifestation of Christ and Gaurānga. I suggest
that you declare yourself as Advaita.\' Do you know what else he said?
He said that you too were a follower of the New Dispensation.\" (All
laugh.)

MASTER (laughing): \"Who knows? But as for myself, I don\'t even know
what the term \'New Dispensation\' means.\" (Laughter.)

RAM: \"Keshab\'s disciples say that he was the first to harmonize jnāna
and bhakti.\"

**Synthesis of jnāna and bhakti**

MASTER (in surprise): \"How is that? What then of the Adhyātma Rāmāyana?
It is written there that, while

praying to Rāma, Nārada said: \'O Rāma, Thou art the Supreme Brahman
described in the Vedas. Thou dwellest with us as a man; Thou appearest
as a man. In reality Thou art not a man; Thou art that Supreme
Brahman.\' Rāma said: \'Nārada, I am very much pleased with you. Accept
a boon from Me.\' Nārada replied: \'What boon shall I ask of Thee? Grant
me pure love for Thy Lotus Feet, and may I never be deluded by Thy
world-bewitching māyā!\' The Adhyātma Rāmāyana is full of such
statements regarding jnāna and bhakti.\"

The conversation turned to Amrita, a disciple of Keshab.

RAM: \"Amrita Babu seems to be in very bad shape.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, he looked very ill when I saw him the other day.\"

RAM: \"Sir, let me tell you about the lectures of the New Dispensation.
While the drum is being played, the members cry out, \'Victory unto
Keshab!\' You say that \'dal\' grows only in a stagnant pool. So Amrita
said one day in the course of his sermon: \'The holy man has no doubt
said that \'dal\' grows in a stagnant pool. But, brothers, we want
\'dal\', we want a sect. Really and truly, I tell you that we want a
sect.\' \"

MASTER: \"What nonsense! Shame on him! What kind of sermon is that?\"

The conversation drifted to the desire of some people for praise.

MASTER: \"They took me to Keshab\'s house to see a performance of the
Nimai-sannyās. I heard, that day, someone speaking of Keshab and Pratap
as Chaitanya and Nityananda. Prasanna asked me, \'Who are you then?\'
Keshab looked at me to see what I would say. I said to him, \'I am the
servant of your servant, the dust of the dust of your feet.\' Keshab
said with a smile, \'You can\'t catch him!\'\"

RAM: \"Sometimes Keshab used to say you were John the Baptist.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"But Keshab also said you were the Chaitanya of the
nineteenth century \[said in English\].\"

MASTER: \"What does that mean?\"

DEVOTEE: \"That Chaitanya has been incarnated again in the present
century of the Christian era, and that you are he.\"

MASTER (absent-mindedly): \"What of it? Can you tell me now how my arm
can be cured? This arm is worrying me so much.\"

They talked about Trailokya\'s music. Trailokya sang devotional songs in
Keshab\'s Brahmo Samaj.

MASTER: \"Ah! How nice his songs are!\"

RAM: \"Do you think they are genuine?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, they are. Otherwise, why should I be so drawn to them?\"

RAM: \"He has composed his songs by borrowing your ideas. While
conducting the worship, Keshab Sen described your feelings and
realizations, and Trailokya Babu composed songs accordingly. Take this
song, for instance:

> *There is an overflow of Joy in the market-place of Love; See how the
> Lord sports with His own in the ecstasy of Bliss!*

He saw you enjoying divine bliss in the company of devotees and wrote
songs like this.\"

MASTER (with a smile) : \"Stop! Don\'t torment me any more. Why should I
be involved in all this?\" (All laugh.)

GIRINDRA: \"The Brahmos say that the Paramahamsa Deva has no faculty for
organization *\[said in English\].*\"

MASTER: \"What does that mean?\"

1.  \"That you don\'t know how to lead a sect; that your intellect is
    rather dull. They say things like that.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER (to Ram): \"Now tell me why my arm was hurt. Stand up and deliver
a lecture on that. (Laughter.)

\"The Brahmos insist that God is formless. Suppose they do. It is enough
to call on Him with sincerity of heart. If the devotee is sincere, then
God, who is the Inner Guide of all, will certainly reveal to the devotee
His true nature.

**Friction between different religious sects**

\"But it is not good to say that what we ourselves think of God is the
only truth and what others think is false; that because we think of God
asformless, therefore He is formless and cannot have any form; that
because we think of God as having form, therefore He has form and cannot
be formless. Can a man really fathom God\'s nature?

\"This kind of friction exists between the Vaishnavas and the *Shaktas*.
The Vaishnava says, \'My Kesava is the only Saviour\', whereas the
*Shakta* insists, \'My Bhagavati is the only Saviour.\'

\"Once I took Vaishnavcharan to Mathur Babu. Now, Vaishnavcharan was a
very learned Vaishnava and an

orthodox devotee of his sect. Mathur, on the other hand, was a devotee
of the Divine Mother. They were engaged in a friendly discussion when
suddenly Vaishnavcharan said, \'Kesava is the only Saviour.\' No sooner
did Mathur hear this than his face became red with anger and he blurted
out, \'You rascal!\' (All laugh.) He was a *Shakta*. Wasn\'t it natural
for him to say that? I gave Vaishnavcharan a nudge.

**Harmony of religions**

\"I see people who talk about religion constantly quarrelling with one
another. Hindus, Mussalmans, Brahmos, *Shaktas*, Vaishnavas, Saivas, all
quarrel with one another. They haven\'t the intelligence to understand
that He who is called Krishna is also Shiva and the Primal Śakti, and
that it is He, again, who is called Jesus and Allah. There is only one
Rāma and He has a thousand names.\'

\"Truth is one; only It is called by different names. All people are
seeking the same Truth; the variance is due to climate, temperament, and
name. A lake has many ghats. From one *Ghat* the Hindus take water in
jars and call it \'jal\'. From another *Ghat* the Mussalmans take water
in leather bags and call it \'pani\'. From a third the Christians take
the same thing and call it \'water\'. (All laugh.) Suppose someone says
that the thing is not \'jal\' but \'pani\', or that it is not \'pani\'
but \'water\', or that it is not \'water\' but \'jal\'. It would indeed
be ridiculous. But this very thing is at the root of the friction among
sects, their misunderstandings and quarrels. This is why people injure
and kill one another, and shed blood, in the name of religion. But this
is not good. Everyone is going toward God. They will all realize Him if
they have sincerity and longing of heart.

(To M.) \"This is for you. All scriptures-the Vedas, the Puranas, the
Tantras-seek Him alone and no one else, only that one Satchidananda.
That which is called Satchidananda Brahman in the Vedas is called
Satchidananda Shiva in the Tantra. Again it is He alone who is called
Satchidananda Krishna in the Puranas.\"

The Master was told that now and then Ram cooked his own food at home.

MASTER (to M.): \"Do you too cook your own meals?\"

M: \"No, sir.\"

MASTER: \"You may try it. With your meals take a little clarified butter
made from cow\'s milk. That will purify your body and mind.\"

A long conversation ensued about Ram\'s household affairs. Ram\'s father
was a devout Vaishnava and worshipped Krishna daily at home. He had
married a second time when Ram was quite young. Both the father and the
stepmother lived with Ram at Ram\'s house. But Ram was never happy with
his stepmother, and this sometimes created a misunderstanding between
himself and his father.

They were talking about this when Ram said, \"My father has gone to the
dogs!\"

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Did you hear that? The father has gone to
the dogs and the son is all right!\"

RAM: \"There is no peace when my stepmother comes home. There is always
some trouble or other. Our family is about to break up. So I say, let
her live with her father.\"

GIRINDRA (to Ram): \"Why don\'t you too keep your wife at her father\'s
home?\" (Laughter.)

MASTER (smiling): \"Are husband and wife like earthen pots or jars, that
you may keep the pot in one place and the lid in another? Shiva in one
place and Śakti in another?\"

RAM: \"Sir, we are quite happy. But when she comes the family is broken
up. If such is the case-\"

**Our duties to father and mother**

MASTER: \"Then build them a separate home. That will be a different
thing. You will defray their monthly expenses. How worthy of worship
one\'s parents are! Rākhāl asked me if he could take the food left on
his father\'s plate. \'What do you mean?\' I said. \'What have you
become that you cannot?\' But it is also true that good people won\'t
give anyone, even a dog, the food from their plates.\"

GIRINDRA: \"Sir, suppose one\'s parents are guilty of a terrible crime,
a heinous sin?\"

MASTER: \"What if they are? You must not renounce your mother even if
she commits adultery. The woman guru of a certain family became corrupt.
The members of the family said that they would like to make the son of
the guru their spiritual guide. But I said: \'How is that? Will you
accept the shoot and give up the yam? Suppose she is corrupt; still you
must regard her as your Ishta. 'Though my guru visits the tavern, still
to me he is the holy Nityānanda.' \"

\"Are father and mother mere trifles? No spiritual practice will bear
fruit unless they are pleased. Chaitanya was intoxicated with the love
of God. Still, before taking to the monastic life, for how many days did
he try to persuade his mother to give him her permission to become a
monk! He said to her: \'Mother, don\'t worry. I shall visit you every
now and then.\'

(To M., reproachfully) \"And let me say this to you. Your father and
mother brought you up. You yourself are the father of several children.
Yet you have left home with your wife. You have cheated your parents.
You

have come away with your wife and children, and you feel you have become
a holy man. Your father doesn\'t need any money from you; otherwise I
should have cried, \'Shame on you!\'\"

Everybody in the room became grave and remained silent.

MASTER: \"A man has certain debts to pay: his debts to the gods and
rishis, and his debts to mother, father, and wife. He cannot achieve
anything without paying the debt he owes to his parents. A man is
indebted to his wife as well. Harish has renounced his wife and is
living here. If he had left her unprovided for, then I should have
called him an abominable wretch.

\"After attaining Knowledge you will regard that very wife as the
manifestation of the Divine Mother Herself. It is written in the Chandi,
\'The Goddess dwells in all beings as the Mother.\' It is She who has
become your mother.

\"All the women you see are only She, the Divine Mother. That is why I
cannot rebuke even Brinde, the maidservant. There are people who spout
verses from the scriptures and talk big, but in their conduct they are
quite different. Ramprasanna is constantly busy procuring opium and milk
for the hathayogi. He says that Manu enjoins it upon man to serve the
*Sādhu*. But his old mother hasn\'t enough to eat. She walks to the
market to buy her own groceries. It makes me very angry.

**Through divine love man transcends his worldly duties**

\"But here you have to consider another thing. When a man is intoxicated
with ecstatic love of God, then who is his father or mother or wife? His
love of God is so intense that he becomes mad with it. Then he has no
duty to perform. He is free from all debts. What is this divine
intoxication? In this state a man forgets the world. He also forgets his
own body, which is so dear to all. Chaitanya had this intoxication. He
plunged into the ocean not knowing that it was the ocean. He dashed
himself again and again on the ground. He was not aware of hunger, of
thirst, or of sleep. He was not at all conscious of any such thing as
his body.\"

All at once Sri Ramakrishna exclaimed, \"Ah, Chaitanya!\" and stood up.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Chaitanya means \'Undivided Consciousness\'.

Vaishnavcharan used to say that Gaurānga was like a bubble in the Ocean
of Undivided Consciousness.

(To the elder Gopal) \"Do you intend to go on a pilgrimage now?\"

GOPAL: \"Yes, sir. I should like to wander about a little.\"

RAM (to Gopal): \"He \[meaning the Master\] says that one becomes a
kutichaka after being a vahudaka. The *Sādhu* that visits many holy
places is called a vahudaka. He whose craving for travel has been
satiated and who sits down in one place is called a kutichaka.

\"He also tells us a parable. Once a bird sat on the mast of a ship.
When the ship sailed through the mouth of the Ganges into the \'black
waters\' of the ocean, the bird failed to notice the fact. When it
finally became aware of the ocean, it left the mast and flew north in
search of land. But it found no limit to the water and so returned.
After resting awhile it flew south. There too it found no limit to the
water. Panting for breath the bird returned to the mast. Again, after
resting awhile, it flew east and then west. Finding no limit to the
Water in any direction, at last it settled down on the mast of the
ship.\"

MASTER (to the elder Gopal and the other devotees): \"As long as a man
feels that God is \'there\', he is ignorant. But he attains Knowledge
when he feels that God is \'here\'.

\"A man wanted a smoke. He went to a neighbour\'s house to light his
charcoal. It was the dead of night and the household was asleep. After
he had knocked a great deal, someone came down to open the door. At
sight of the man he asked, \'Hello! What\'s the matter?\' The man
replied: \'Can\'t you guess? You know how fond I am of smoking. I have
come here to light my charcoal.\' The neighbour said: \'Ha! Ha! You are
a fine man indeed! You took the trouble to come and do all this knocking
at the door! Why, you have a lighted lantern in your hand!\' (All
laugh.)

\"What a man seeks is very near him. Still he wanders about from place
to place.\"

RAM: \"Sir, I now realize why a guru asks some of his disciples to visit
the four principal holy places of the country. Once having wandered
about, the disciple discovers that it is the same here as there. Then he
returns to the guru. All this wandering is only to create faith in the
guru\'s words.\"

After this conversation had come to an end, Sri Ramakrishna extolled
Ram\'s virtues.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"How many fine qualities Ram possesses! How
many devotees he serves and looks after! (To Ram) Adhar told me that you
showed him great kindness.\"

Adhar, a beloved householder devotee of the Master, had recently
arranged some religious music at his house. The Master and many devotees
had been present. But Adhar had forgotten to invite Ram, who was a very
proud man and had complained about it to his friends. So Adhar had gone
to Ram\'s house to express his regret for the mistake.

RAM: \"It wasn\'t really Adhar\'s mistake. I have come to know that
Rākhāl is to blame. Rākhāl was given charge-\"

MASTER: \"You mustn\'t find fault with Rākhāl . He\'s a mere child. Even
now you can bring out his mother\'s milk by squeezing his throat.\"

RAM: \"Sir, why should you speak that way? It was such an occasion!\"

MASTER: (interrupting): \"Adhar simply didn\'t remember to invite you.
He is absent-minded. The other day he went with me to Jadu Mallick\'s
house. As we took our leave, I said to him, \'You haven\'t offered
anything to the Goddess in the chapel\' \'Sir,\' he said, \'I didn\'t
know one should.\'

(To Ram) \"Suppose he didn\'t invite you to his house. Why such a fuss
about going to a place where the name of the Lord was sung? One may go
unasked to participate in religious music. One doesn\'t have to be
invited.\"

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 22**

ADVICE TO AN ACTOR

> Saturday, May 24, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting on the small couch in his room. Rākhāl , M.,
and, several other devotees were

present. A special worship of Kāli had been performed in the temple the
previous night. In connection with the

worship a theatrical performance of the Vidyasundar had been staged in
the Natmandir. The Master had

watched a part of it that morning. The actors came to his room to pay
him their respects. The Master, in a

happy mood, became engaged in conversation with a fair complexioned
young man who had taken the part of

Vidyā and played his part very well.

MASTER (to the actor): \"Your acting was very good. If a person excels
in singing, music, dancing, or any other art, he can also quickly
realize God provided he strives sincerely.

\"Just as you practise much in order to sing, dance, and play on
instruments, so one should practise the art of fixing the mind on God.
One should practise regularly such disciplines as worship, japa, and
meditation.

\"Are you married? Any children?\"

ACTOR: \"Yes, sir. I had a girl who died. Another child has been born.\"

MASTER: \"Ah! A death and a birth, and all so quickly! You are so young!
There is a saying: \'My husband died just after our marriage. There are
so many nights for me to weep!\' You are no doubt realizing the nature
of worldly happiness. The world is like a hog plum. The hog plum has
only pit and skin, and after eating it you suffer from colic.

\"You are an actor in the theatre. That\'s fine. But it is a very
painful profession. You are young now; so you have a full, round face.
Afterwards there will be hollows in your cheeks. Almost all actors
become like that; they get hollow cheeks and big bellies. (Laughter.)

\"Why did I stay to watch your performance? I found the rhythm, the
music, and the melody all correct. Then the Divine Mother showed me that
it was God alone who acted in the performance in the roles of the
players.\"

ACTOR: \"Sir, what is the difference between lust and desire?\"

MASTER: \"Lust is like the root of the tree, and desires are branches
and twigs.

**Passions should be directed to God**

\"One cannot completely get rid of the six passions: lust, anger, greed,
and the like. Therefore one should direct them to God. If you must have
desire and greed, then you should desire love of God and be greedy to
attain Him. If you must be conceited and egotistic, then feel conceited
and egotistic thinking that you are the servant of God, the child of
God.

\"A man cannot see God unless he gives his whole mind to Him. The mind
is wasted on \'woman and gold\'. Take your own case. You have children
and are occupied with the theatre. The mind cannot be united with God on
account of these different activities.

\"As long as there is bhoga, there will be less of yoga. Furthermore,
bhoga begets suffering. It is said in the Bhagavata that the Avadhuta
chose a kite as one of his twenty-four gurus. The kite had a fish in its
beak; so it was surrounded by a thousand crows. Whichever way it flew
with the fish, the crows pursued it crying, \'Caw! Caw!\' When all of a
sudden the fish dropped from its beak, the crows flew after the fish,
leaving the kite alone.

\"The \'fish\' is the object of enjoyment. The \'crows\' are worries and
anxiety. Worries and anxiety are inevitable

with enjoyment. No sooner does one give up enjoyment than one finds
peace.

**Money is the source of trouble**

\"What is more, money itself becomes a source of trouble. Brothers may
live happily, but they get into trouble when the property is divided.
Dogs lick one another\'s bodies; they are perfectly friendly. But when
the house-holder throws them a little food, they get into a scrap.

\"Come here now and then. (Pointing to M. and the others) They come here
on Sundays and other holidays.\"

ACTOR: \"We have holidays for three months, during the rainy and harvest
seasons. It is our good fortune to be able to visit you. On our way to
Dakshineswar we heard of two persons-yourself and Jnanarnava.\"

MASTER: \"Be on friendly terms with your brothers. It looks well. You
must have noticed in your theatrical performance that if four singers
sing each in a different way, the play is spoiled.\"

Actor: \"Yes, sir. Many birds are trapped in a net; if they all fly
together and drag the net in one direction, then many of them may be
saved. But that doesn\'t happen if they try to fly in different
directions.

\"One also sees in a theatrical performance a person keeping a pitcher
of water on his head and at the same time dancing about.\"

**Do your duties and remember God**

MASTER: \"Live in the world but keep the pitcher steady on your head;
that is to say, keep the mind firmly on God.

\"I once said to the sepoys from the barracks: \'Do your duty in the
world but remember that the \"pestle of death\" will some time smash
your hand. Be alert about it.\'

\"In Kamarpukur I have seen the women of carpenter families making
flattened rice with a husking-machine. One woman kicks the end of the
wooden beam, and another woman, while nursing her baby, turns the paddy
in the mortar dug in the earth. The second woman is always alert lest
the pestle of the machine should fall on her hand. With the other hand
she fries the soaked paddy in a pan. Besides, she is talking with
customers; she says: \'You owe us so much money. Please pay it before
you go.\' Likewise, do your different duties in the world, fixing your
mind on God. But practice is necessary, and one should also be alert.
Only in this way can one safeguard both―God and the world.\"

MASTER: \"Proof? God can be seen. By practising spiritual discipline one
sees God, through His grace. The rishis directly realized the Self. One
cannot know the truth about God through science. Science gives us
information only about things perceived by the senses, as for instance:
this material mixed with that material gives such and such a result, and
that material mixed with this material gives such and such a result.

\"For this reason a man cannot comprehend spiritual things with his
ordinary intelligence. To understand them he must live in the company of
holy persons. You learn to feel the pulse by living with a physician.\"

ACTOR: \"Yes, sir. Now I understand.\"

MASTER: \"You must practise tapasya. Only then can you attain the goal.
It will avail you nothing even if you learn the texts of the scriptures
by heart. You cannot become intoxicated by merely saying \'siddhi\' over
and over. You must swallow some.

\"One cannot explain the vision of God to others. One cannot explain
conjugal happiness to a child five years old.\"

ACTOR: \"How does One realize the Ātman?\"

Just then Rākhāl was about to take his meal in the Master\'s room. He
hesitated at the sight of so many people. During those days the Master
looked on Rākhāl as Gopala and on himself as Mother Yaśoda.

MASTER (to Rākhāl ): \"Why don\'t you eat? Let the people stand aside if
you wish it. (To a devotee) Keep some ice for Rākhāl . (To Rākhāl ) Do
you intend to go to Vanhooghly? Don\'t go in this sun.\"

Rākhāl sat down to his meal. Sri Ramakrishna again spoke to the actor.

MASTER: \"Why didn\'t all of you take your meal from the kitchen of the
Kāli temple? That would have been nice.\"

ACTOR: \"All of us don\'t have the same opinion about food; so our food
is cooked separately. All don\'t like to eat in the guest-house.\"

While Rākhāl was taking his meal, the Master and the devotees sat on the
porch and continued their conversation.

**Means of Self-realization**

MASTER (to the actor): \"You asked me about Self-realization. Longing is
the means of realizing Ātman. A man must strive to attain God with all
his body, with all his mind, and with all his speech. Because of an
excess of bile one gets jaundice. Then one sees everything as yellow;
one perceives no colour but yellow. Among you actors, those who take
only the roles of women acquire the nature of a woman; by thinking of
woman your ways and thoughts become womanly. Just so, by thinking day
and night of God one acquires the nature of God.

\"The mind is like white linen just returned from the laundry. It takes
on the colour you dip it in.\"

ACTOR: \"But it must first be sent to the laundry.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. First is the purification of the mind. Afterwards, if you
direct the mind to the contemplation of God, it will be coloured by God-

Consciousness. Again, if you direct the mind to worldly duties, such as
the acting of a play, it will be coloured by worldliness.\"

Sri Ramakrishna had rested on his bed only a few minutes when Hari,
Narayan, Narendra Bannerji, and other devotees arrived from Calcutta and
saluted him. Narendra Bannerji was the son of the professor of Sanskrit
at the Presidency College of Calcutta. Because of friction with other
members of the family, he had rented a separate house where he lived
with his wife and children. Narendra was a very simple and guileless
man. He practised spiritual discipline and, at the time of meditation,
heard various sounds-the sound of a gong, and so on. He had travelled in
different parts of India and he visited the Master now and then.

Narayan was a school boy sixteen or seventeen years old. He often
visited the Master, who was very fond of him.

Hari lived with his brothers at their Baghbazar house. He had studied up
to the matriculation class in the General Assembly Institution. Then he
had given up his studies and devoted his time at home to the
contemplation of God, the reading of the scriptures, and the practice of
yoga. He also visited the Master now and then.

Sri Ramakrishna often sent for Hari when he went to Balarām\'s house in
Baghbazar.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"I have heard a great deal about Buddha. He
is one of the ten Incarnations of God.2 Brahman is immovable, immutable,
inactive, and of the nature of Consciousness. When a man merges his
buddhi, his intelligence, in Bodha, Consciousness, then he attains the
Knowledge of Brahman; he becomes

buddha, enlightened.

\"Nangta used to say that the mind merges in the buddhi, and the buddhi
in Bodha, Consciousness.

\"The aspirant does not attain the Knowledge of Brahman as long as he is
conscious of his ego. The ego comes under one\'s control after one has
obtained the Knowledge of Brahman and seen God. Otherwise the ego cannot
be controlled. It is difficult to catch one\'s own shadow. But when the
sun is overhead, the shadow is within a few inches of the body.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"What is the vision of God like?\"

MASTER : \"Haven\'t you seen a theatrical performance? The people are
engaged in conversation, when suddenly the curtain goes up. Then the
entire mind of the audience is directed to the play. The people don\'t
look at other things any longer. Samādhi is to go within oneself like
that. When the curtain is rung down, people look around again. Just so,
when the, curtain of māyā falls, the mind becomes externalized.

(To Narendra Bannerji) \"You have travelled a great deal. Tell us some
thing about the sādhus.\"

Narendra told the story of two yogis in Bhutan who used to drink daily a
pound of the bitter juice of neem-leaves. He had also visited the
hermitage of a holy man on the bank of the Narmada. At the sight of the
Bengali Babu dressed in European clothes, the sādhu had remarked, \"He
has a knife hidden under his clothes, next to his belly.\"

**Keeping the pictures of holy persons**

MASTER: \"One should keep pictures of holy men in one\'s room. That
constantly quickens divine ideas.\"

BANNERJI: \"I have your picture in my room; also the picture of a sādhu
living in the mountains, blowing on a piece of lighted charcoal, in a
bowl of hemp.\"

MASTER: \"It is true that one\'s spiritual feelings are awakened by
looking at the picture of a sādhu. It is like being reminded of the
custard-apple by looking at an imitation one, or like stimulating the
desire for enjoyment by looking at a young woman. Therefore I tell you
that you should constantly live in the company of holy men.

(To Bannerji) \"You know very well the suffering of the world. You
suffer whenever you accept enjoyment. As long as the kite kept the fish
in its beak, it was tormented by the flock of crows.

\"One finds peace of mind in the company of holy men. The alligator
remains under water a long time. But every now and then it rises to the
surface and breathes with a deep wheezing noise. Then it gives a sigh of
relief.\"

ACTOR: \"Revered sir, what you have just said about enjoyment is very
true. One ultimately courts disaster if one prays to God for enjoyment.
Various desires come to the mind and by no means all of them are good.
God is the Kalpataru, the Wish-fulfilling Tree. A man gets whatever he
asks of God. Suppose it comes to his mind: \'God is the Kalpataru. Well,
let me see if a tiger will appear before me.\' Because he thinks of the
tiger, it really appears and devours him.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, you must remember that the tiger comes. What more shall I
tell you? Keep your mind on God. Don\'t forget Him. God will certainly
reveal Himself to you if you pray to Him with sincerity. Another thing.
Sing the name of God at the end of each performance. Then the actors,
the singers, and the audience will go home with the thought of God in
their minds.\"

The actors saluted the Master and took their leave.

Two ladies, devotees of Sri Ramakrishna, entered the room and saluted
the Master. They had been fasting in preparation for this visit. They
were sisters-in-law, the wives of two brothers, and were twenty-two or
twenty-three years old. They were mothers of children. Both of them had
their faces covered with veils.

MASTER (to the ladies): \"Worship Śiva. This worship is described in a
book called the Nityakarma. Learn the rituals from it. In order to
perform the worship of God you will be preoccupied for a longtime with
such religious duties as plucking flowers, making sandal-paste,
polishing the utensils of worship, and arranging offerings. As you
perform these duties your mind will naturally be directed to God. You
will get rid of meanness, anger, jealousy, and so forth. When you two
sisters talk to each other, always talk about spiritual matters.

\"The thing is somehow to unite the mind with God. You must not forget
Him, not even once. Your thought of Him should be like the flow of oil,
without any interruption. If you worship with love even a brick or stone
as God, then through His grace you can see Him.

\"Remember what I have just said to you. One should perform such worship
as the Śiva Puja. Once the mind has become mature, one doesn\'t have to
continue formal worship for long. The mind then always remains united
with God; meditation and contemplation become a constant habit of
mind.\"

ELDER SISTER-IN-LAW: \"Will you please give us some instruction?\"

MASTER (affectionately): \"I don\'t give initiation. If a guru gives
initiation he must assume responsibility for the disciple\'s sin and
suffering. The Divine Mother has placed me in the state of a child.
Perform the Śiva Puja as I told you. Come here now and then. We shall
see what happens later on through the will of God. I asked you to chant
the name of Hari at home. Are you doing that?\"

ELDER SISTER-IN-LAW: \"Yes.\"

MASTER: \"Why have you fasted? You should take your meal before you come
here. Women are but so many forms of my Divine Mother. I cannot bear to
see them suffer; You are all images of the Mother of the Universe. Come
here after you have eaten, and you will feel happy.\"

Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna asked. Ramlal to give the ladies some food.
They were given fruit, sweets, drinks, and other offerings from the
temple.

The Master said: \"You have eaten something. Now my mind is at peace. I
cannot bear to see women fast.\"

It was about five o\'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting
on the steps of the Śiva temples.

Adhar, Dr. Nitai, M., and several other devotees were with him.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"I want to tell you something. A change has
been coming over my nature.\"

The Master came down a step and sat near the devotees. It seemed that he
intended to communicate some of his deeper experiences to them.

**God in human forms**

MASTER: \"You are devotees. I have no hesitation in telling you this.
Nowadays I don\'t see the Spirit-form of God. He is revealed to me in
human form. It is my nature to see the form of God, to touch and embrace
Him. God is saying to me, \'You have assumed a body; therefore enjoy God
through His human forms.\'

\"God no doubt dwells in all, but He manifests Himself more through man
than through other beings. Is man an insignificant thing? He can think
of God, he can think of the Infinite, while other living beings cannot.
God exists in other living beings-animals, plants, nay, in all beings-,
but He manifests Himself more through man than through these others.
Fire exists in all beings, in all things; but its presence is felt more
in wood. Rāma said to Lakshmana: \'Look at the elephant, brother. He is
such a big animal, but he cannot think of God.\'

**Divine Incarnation**

\"But in the Incarnation there is a greater manifestation of God than in
other men. Rāma said to Lakshmana, \'Brother, if you see in a man
ecstatic love of God, if he laughs, weeps, and dances in divine ecstasy,
then know for certain that I dwell in him.\"

The Master remained silent. After a few minutes he resumed the
conversation.

**Master and Keshab**

MASTER: \"Keshab Sen used to come here frequently. As a result he
changed a great deal. Of late he became quite a remarkable man. Many a
time he came here with his party; but he also wanted to come alone. In
the earlier years of his life Keshab didn\'t have much opportunity to
live in the company of holy men.

\"I visited him at his house in Colootola Street. Hriday was with me. We
were shown into the room where Keshab was working. He was writing
something. After a long while he put aside his pen, got off his chair,
and sat on the floor with us. But he didn\'t salute us or show us
respect in any other way.

\"He used to come here now and then. One day in a spiritual mood I said
to him: \'One should not sit before a sādhu with one leg over the other.
That increases one\'s rajas.\' As soon as he and his friends would
arrive, I would salute them before they bowed to me. Thus they gradually
learnt to salute a holy man, touching the ground with their foreheads.

\"I said to Keshab: \'Chant the name of Hari. In the Kaliyuga one should
sing the name and glories of God.\' After that they began to sing the
name of God with drums and cymbals.

\"Do you know how my faith in the name of Hari was all the more
strengthened? Holy men, as you know, frequently visit the temple garden.
Once a sādhu from Multan arrived. He was waiting for a party going to
Gangasagar. (Pointing to M.) The sādhu was of his age. It was he who
said to me, \'The way to realize God in the Kaliyuga is the path of
bhakti as prescribed by Nārada.\'

\"One day Keshab came here with his followers. They stayed till ten at
night. We were all seated in the Panchavati. Pratap and several others
said they would like to spend the night here. Keshab said: \'No, I must
go. I have some work to do.\' I laughed and said: \'Can\'t you sleep
without the smell of your fish-basket?

Once a fishwife was a guest in the house of a gardener who raised
flowers. She came there with her empty basket, after selling fish in the
market, and was asked to sleep in a room where flowers were kept. But,
because of the fragrance of the flowers, she couldn\'t get to sleep for
a long time. Her hostess saw her condition and said, \"Hello! Why are
you tossing from side to side so restlessly?\" The fishwife said: \"I
don\'t know, friend. Perhaps the smell of the flowers has been
disturbing my sleep. Can you give me my fish-basket? Perhaps that will
put me to sleep.\"

The basket was brought to her. She sprinkled water on it and set it near
her nose. Then she fell sound asleep and snored all night.\'

\"At this story the followers of Keshab burst into loud laughter.

God, the scripture, and the devotee are identical

\"Keshab conducted the prayer that evening at the bathing-ghat on the
river. After the worship I said to him: \'It is God who manifests
Himself, in one aspect, as the scriptures; therefore one should worship
the sacred books, such as the Vedas, the Puranas, and the Tantras. In
another aspect He has become the devotee. The heart of the devotee is
God\'s drawing-room. One can easily find one\'s master in the
drawing-room. Therefore, by worshipping His devotee, one worships God
Himself.\'

\"Keshab and his followers listened to my words with great attention. It
was a full-moon night. The sky was

flooded with light. We were seated in the open court at the top of the
stairs leading to the river. I said, \'Now let us all chant,
\"Bhagavata-Bhakta-Bhagavan.\" \' All chanted in unison,
\'Bhagavata-Bhakta-Bhagavan.\' Next I said to them, \'Say, \"Brahman is
verily Śakti; Śakti is verily Brahman.\" \' Again they chanted in
unison. \'Brahman is verily Śakti; Śakti is verily Brahman.\' I said to
them: \'He whom you address as Brahma is none other than She whom I call
Mother. Mother is a very sweet name.\'

\"Then I said to them, \'Say, \"Guru-Krishna-Vaishnava.\"\' At this
Keshab said: \'We must not go so far, sir. If we do that, then all will
take us for orthodox Vaishnavas.\'

**Brahman and Śakti**

\"I used to tell Keshab now and then: \'He whom you address as Brahma is
none other than She whom I call Śakti, the Primal Energy. It is called
Brahman in the Vedas when it transcends speech and thought and is
without attributes and action. I call it Śakti, *Ādyāśakti*, and so
forth, when I find it creating, preserving, and destroying the
universe.\'

**Difficulties of householder\'s life**

\"I said to Keshab: \'It is extremely difficult to realize God while
leading a worldly life. How can a typhoid patient be cured if he is kept
in a room where tamarind, pickle, and jars of water are kept? Therefore
one should go into solitude now and then to practise spiritual
discipline. When the trunk of a tree becomes thick and strong, an
elephant can be tied to it; but a young sapling is eaten by cattle.\'
That is why Keshab would say in his lectures, \'Live in the world after
being strengthened in spiritual life.\'

(To the devotees) \"You see, Keshab was a great scholar. He lectured in
English. Many people honoured him. Queen Victoria herself talked to him.
But when Keshab came here he would be bare-bodied and bring some fruit,
as one should when visiting a holy man. He was totally free from
egotism.

(To Adhar) \"You are a scholar and a deputy magistrate, but with all
that you are hen-pecked. Go forward. Beyond the forest of sandal-wood
there are many more valuable things: silver-mines, gold-mines, diamonds,
and other gems. The wood-cutter was chopping wood in the forest; the
brahmachāri said to him, \'Go forward.\' \"

Sri Ramakrishna came down from the steps of the Śiva temples and went

to his own room through the courtyard. The devotees were with him. Just
then Ram Chatterji came and said that the Holy Mother\'s attendant had
had an attack of cholera.

RAM (to the Master): \"I told you about it at ten o\'clock this morning,
but you didn\'t pay any attention to me.\"

MASTER: \"What could I do?\"

RAM: \"Yes, what could you do! But there were Rākhāl , Ramlal, and
others. Even they didn\'t pay any attention.\"

1.  \"Kishori has gone to Alambazar to get medicine.\" MASTER: \"Alone?
    Where will he get medicine?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Yes, alone. He will get it at Alambazar.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"Tell the nurse what to do if the illness takes a turn
for the worse or if the patient feels better.\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

The ladies mentioned before saluted the Master and were about to take
their leave. Sri Ramakrishna again said

to them: \"Perform the Śiva Puja according to my instruction. And have
something to eat before you come here. Otherwise I shall feel unhappy.
Come another day.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sat down on the porch west of his room. Narendra
Bannerji, Hari, M., and others sat by his side. The Master knew about
Narendra\'s family difficulties.

MASTER: \"You see, all these sufferings are \'because of a piece of loin
cloth\'. A man takes a wife and begets children; therefore he must
secure a job. The sādhu is worried about his loin-cloth, and the
householder about his wife. Further, the householder may not live on
good terms with his relatives; so he must live separately with his wife.
(With a laugh) Chaitanya once said to Nityananda: \'Listen to me,
brother. A man entangled in worldliness can never be free.\' \"

M. (to himself): \"Perhaps the Master is referring to the world of
avidyā. It is the world of avidyā that entangles a householder.\"

M. was still living in a separate house with his wife, on account of a
misunderstanding with the other members of his family.

MASTER (to Bannerji, pointing to M.): \"He also lives in a separate
house. You two will get along very well. Once two men happened to meet.
One said to the other, \'Who are you?\' \'Oh, I am away from my
country\', was the other\'s reply. The second man then asked the first,
\'And who are you, pray?\' \'Oh, I am away from my beloved\', was the
answer. Both were in the same plight; so they got along very well. (All
laugh.)

\"But one need not have any fear if one takes refuge in God. God
protects His devotee.\"

HARI: \"Well, why does it take many people such a long time to realize
Him?\"

MASTER: \"The truth is that a man doesn\'t feel restless for God unless
he is finished with his enjoyments and duties. The physician says,
referring to the patient: \'Let a few days pass first. Then a little
medicine will do him good.\'

\"Nārada said to Rāma: \'Rāma, You are passing Your time in Ayhodhya.
How will Ravana be killed? You have

taken this human body for that purpose alone.\' Rāma replied: \'Nārada,
let the right time come. Let Ravana\'s past actions begin to bear fruit.
Then everything will be made ready for his death.\' \"

HARI: \"Why is there so much suffering in the world?\"

MASTER: \"This world is the līlā of God. It is like a game. In this game
there are joy and sorrow, virtue and vice, knowledge and ignorance, good
and evil. The game cannot continue if sin and suffering are altogether
eliminated from the creation.

\"In the game of hide-and-seek one must touch the \'granny\' in order to
be free. But the \'granny\' is never pleased if she is touched at the
very outset. It is God\'s wish that the play should continue for some
time. Then-

Out of a hundred thousand kites, at best but one or two break free;

And Thou dost laugh and clap Thy hands, O Mother, watching them!

In other words, after the practice of hard spiritual discipline, one or
two have the vision of God, through His grace, and are liberated. Then
the Divine Mother claps Her hands in joy and exclaims, \'Bravo! There
they go!\' \"

HARI: \"But this play of God is our death.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Please tell me who you are. God alone has become all
this-māyā, the universe, living

beings, and the twenty-four cosmic principles. \'As the snake I bite,
and as the charmer I cure.\' It is God Himself who has become both vidyā
and avidyā. He remains deluded by the māyā of avidyā, ignorance. Again,
with the help of the guru, He is cured by the māyā of vidyā, Knowledge.

\"Ignorance, Knowledge, and Perfect Wisdom. The Jnāni sees that God
alone exists and is the Doer, that He creates, preserves, and destroys.
The vijnāni sees that it is God who has become all this.

\"After attaining mahabhava and prema one realizes that nothing exists
but God. Bhakti pales before bhava.

Bhāva ripens into mahabhava and prema.

(To Bannerji) \"Do you still hear that gong-like sound at the time of
meditation?\"

BANNERJI : \"Yes, sir. Every day. Besides, I have visions of God\'s
form. Do such things stop after the mind has once experienced them?\"

MASTER: \"True. Once the wood catches fire, it cannot be put out. (To
the devotees) He knows many things about faith.\"

BANNERJI : \"I have too much faith.\"

MASTER: \"Bring the women of your family with those of Balarām\'s.\"

BANNERJI: \"Who is Balarām?\"

MASTER: \"Don\'t you know Balarām? He lives at Bosepara.\"

Sri Ramakrishna loved guileless people. Narendra Bannerji was absolutely
guileless. The Master loved Niranjan because he, too, was without guile.

MASTER (to M.): \"Why do I ask you to see Niranjan? It is to find out if
he is truly guileless.\"

**Sunday, May 25, 1884**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the cement platform that encircled the
trunk of the old banyan-tree in the Panchavati. Vijay, Surendra,
Bhavanath, Rākhāl , and other devotees were present, a few of them
sitting with the Master on the platform, the rest on the ground below.
The devotees had thought of celebrating the Master\'s birthday, which
had had to be put off because of his illness. Since Sri Ramakrishna now
felt much better, the devotees wanted to have the celebration that day.
A woman musician, a famous singer of kirtan, was going to entertain them
with devotional songs.

It was one o\'clock in the afternoon. M. had been looking for Sri
Ramakrishna in the Master\'s room. When he did not find him there, he
went to the Panchavati and eagerly asked the devotees, \"Where is he?\"
He was standing right in front of the Master but in his excitement did
not notice him. The devotees laughed loudly. A moment later M. saw Sri
Ramakrishna and felt very much embarrassed. He prostrated himself before
the Master, who sat there facing the south and smiling happily. Kedār
and Vijay were sitting at his left. These two devotees had had a
misunderstanding recently when Kedār had cut off his connexion with the
Brahmo Samaj.

MASTER (to M., with a smile): \"You see how I have united them?\" The
Master had brought a mādhavi creeper from Vrindāvan in the year 1868 and
had planted it in the Panchavati. The creeper had grown big and strong.
Some children were jumping and swinging from it. The Master observed
them and laughed. He said: \"They are like young monkeys. They will not
give up swinging even though they sometimes fall to the ground.\"
Noticing that Surendra was standing before him, the Master said to him
affectionately: \"Come up and sit with us on the platform. Then you can
dangle your feet comfortably.\" Surendra went up and took his seat.
Bhavanath had his coat on. Surendra said to him, \"Are you going to
England?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"God is our England. Now and then I used to leave off
my clothes and joyfully roam about

naked. Once Sambhu said to me: \'It is very comfortable to walk about
naked. That is why you do it. Once I did it myself.\' \"

SURENDRA: \"On returning from the office, as I put away my coat and
trousers, I say to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother, how tightly You have
bound me to the world!\' \"

MASTER: \"There are eight fetters with which man is bound: shame;
hatred, fear, pride of caste, hesitation, the desire to conceal, and so
forth.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sang:

> *Mother, this is the grief that sorely grieves my heart,*
>
> *That even with Thee for Mother, and though I am wide awake,*
>
> *There should be robbery in my house. . . .*

He continued:

> *In the world\'s busy market-place, O Syama, Thou art flying kites;*
>
> *High up they soar on the wind of hope, held fast by māyā\'s string.*
>
> *Their frames are human skeletons, their sails of the three gunas
> made;*
>
> *But all their curious workmanship is merely for ornament.*
>
> *Upon the kite-strings Thou hast rubbed the manja-paste of
> worldliness,*
>
> *So as to make each straining strand all the more sharp and strong.*
>
> *Out of a hundred thousand kites, at best but one or two break free;*
>
> *And Thou dost laugh and clap Thy hands, O Mother, watching them!*
>
> *On favouring winds, says Ramprasad, the kites set loose will
> speedily*
>
> *Be borne away to the Infinite, across the sea of the world.*

MASTER: \"\'Māyā\'s string\' means wife and children.

Upon the kite-strings Thou hast rubbed the manja-paste of worldliness.

\'Worldliness\' means \'woman and gold\'.

**The three gunas**

\"The three gunas―sattva, rajas, and tamas―have men under their control.
They are like three brothers: As long as sattva exists, it calls on
rajas for help; and rajas can get help from tamas. The three gunas are
so many robbers. Tamas kills and rajas binds. Sattva no doubt releases
man from his bondage, but it cannot take him to God.\"

VIJAY (smiling): \"It is because sattva, too, is a robber.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"True. Sattva cannot take man to God, but it shows
him the way.\"

BHAVANATH: \"These are wonderful words indeed.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, This is a lofty thought.\"

Listening to these words of the Master, the devotees felt very happy.

**The bondage of \"woman and gold\"**

MASTER: \" \'Woman and gold\' is the cause of bondage. \'Woman and
gold\' alone constitutes samsara, the world. It is \'woman and gold\'
that keeps one from seeing God. (Holding the towel in front of his face)
Do you see my face any more? Of course not. The towel hides it. No
sooner is the covering of \'woman and gold\' removed than one attains
Chidananca, Consciousness and Bliss.

**Corrupting influence of lust**

\"Let me tell you something. He who has renounced the pleasure of a wife
has verily renounced the pleasure of the world. God is very near to such
a person.\"

The devotees listened to these words in silence.

MASTER (to Kedār, Vijay, and the other devotees): \"He who has renounced
the pleasure of a wife has verily renounced the pleasure of the world.
It is \'woman and gold\' that hides God. You people have such imposing
moustaches, and yet you too are involved in \'woman and gold\'. Tell me
if it isn\'t true. Search your heart and answer me.\"

VIJAY: \"Yes, it is true.\"

Kedār remained silent.

MASTER: \"I see that all are under the control of woman. One day I went
to Captain\'s house. From there I was to go to Ram\'s house. So I said
to Captain, \'Please give me my carriage hire.\' He asked his wife about
it. She too held back and said: \'What\'s the matter? What\'s the
matter?\' At last Captain said, \'Ram will take care of it.\' You see,
the Gitā, the Bhagavata, and the Vedānta all bow before a woman! (All
laugh.)

\"A man leaves his money, his property, and everything in the hands of
his wife. But he says with affected simplicity, \'I have such a nature
that I cannot keep even two rupees with me.\'

\"A man went to an office in search of a job. There were many vacancies,
but the manager did not grant his request. A friend said to the
applicant, \'Appeal to Golapi, and you will get the job.\' Golapi was
the manager\'s mistress.

\"Men do not realize how far they are dragged down by women. Once I went
to the Fort in a carriage, feeling all the while that I was going along
a level road. At last I found that I had gone four storeys down. It was
a sloping road.

\"A man possessed by a ghost does not know he is under the ghost\'s
control. He thinks he is quite normal.\"

VIJAY (smiling): \"But he can be cured by an exorcist if he finds one.\"

In answer to Vijay Sri Ramakrishna only said, \"That depends on the will
of God.\" Then he went on with his talk about women.

MASTER: \"Everyone I talk to says, \'Yes, sir, my wife is good.\' Nobody
says that his wife is bad. (All laugh.) Those who constantly live with
\'woman and gold\' are so infatuated with it that they don\'t see things
properly. Chess-players oftentimes cannot see the right move for their
pieces on the board. But those who watch the game from a distance can
understand the moves more accurately.

\"Woman is the embodiment of māyā. In the course of his hymn to Rāma,
Nārada said: \'O Rāma, all men are parts of Thee. All women are parts of
Sita, the personification of Thy māyā. Please deign to grant that I may
have pure love for Thy Lotus Feet and that I may not be deluded by Thy
world bewitching māyā. I do not want any other favour than that.\' \"

Surendra\'s younger brother and his nephews were present. The brother
worked in an office and one of the nephews was studying law.

MASTER (to Surendra\'s relatives): \"My advice to you is not to become
attached to the world. You see, Rākhāl now understands what is knowledge
and what is ignorance. He can discriminate between the Real and the
unreal. So I say to him: \'Go home. You may come here once in a while
and spend a day or two with me.\'

\"Have a friendly relationship with one another. That will be for your
good and make you all happy. In a theatre

the performance goes well only if the musicians sing with one voice. And
that also gladdens the hearts of the audience.

\"Do your worldly duties with a part of your mind and direct most of it
to God. A sādhu should think of God with three quarters of his mind and
with one quarter should do his other duties. He should be very alert
about spiritual things. The snake is very sensitive in its tail. Its
whole body reacts when it is hurt there. Similarly, the whole life of a
sādhu is affected when his spirituality is touched.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was going to the pine-grove and asked Gopal of Sinthi to
take his umbrella to his room. Arrangements had been made in the
Panchavati for the kirtan. When the Mister had returned and taken his
seat again among the devotees, the musician began her song. Suddenly
there came a rain-storm. The Master went back to his room with the
devotees, the musician accompanying them to continue her songs there.

MASTER (to Gopal): \"Have you brought the umbrella?\"

GOPAL: \"No, sir. I forgot all about it while listening to the music.\"

The umbrella had been left in the Panchavati and Gopal hurried to fetch
it.

MASTER: \"I am generally careless, but not to that extent. Rākhāl also
is very careless. Referring to the date of an invitation, he says \'the
eleventh\' instead of \'the thirteenth\'. And Gopal-he belongs in a herd
of cows!\"

The musician sang a song about the monastic life of Chaitanya. Now and
then she improvised lines: *\"He will*

*not look upon a woman; for that is against the sannyasi\'s duty.\"
\"Eager to take away men\'s sorrows, he will not look upon a woman.\"
\"For the Lord\'s birth as Sri Chaitanya otherwise would be in vain.\"*

The Master stood up, as he heard about Chaitanya\'s renunciation, and
went into samādhi. The devotees put garlands of flowers around his neck.
Bhavanath and Rākhāl supported his body lest he should fall on the
ground. Vijay, Kedār, Ram, M., Lātu, and the other devotees stood around
him in a circle, recalling one of the scenes of Chaitanya\'s kirtan.

The Master gradually came down to the sense plane. He was talking to
Krishna, now and then uttering the word \"Krishna\". He could not say it
very distinctly because of the intensity of his spiritual emotion. He
said: \"Krishna! Krishna! Krishna! Krishna Satchidananda! Nowadays I do
not see Your form. Now I see You both inside me and outside. I see that
it is You who have become the universe, all living beings, the
twenty-four cosmic principles, and everything else. You alone have
become mind, intelligence, everything. It is said in the

\'Hymn of Salutation to the Guru\': *\'I bow down to the Guru by whose
grace I have realized Him who pervades the indivisible universe of the
animate and the inanimate.\'*

*\"You alone are the Indivisible. Again, it is You who pervade the
universe of the animate and the inanimate. You are verily the manifold
universe; again, You alone are its basis. O Krishna! You are my life. O
Krishna! You are my mind. O Krishna! You are my intelligence. O Krishna!
You are my soul. O Govinda! You are my life-breath. You are my life
itself.\"*

Vijay was also in an ecstatic mood. The Master asked him, \"My dear sir,
have you too become unconscious?\" \"No, sir\", said Vijay humbly.

The music went on. The musician was singing about the blinding love of
God. As she improvised the lines:

> *O Beloved of my soul! Within the chamber of my heart*
>
> *I would have kept You day and night!*

The Master again went into samādhi. His injured arm rested on
Bhavanath\'s shoulder.

Sri Ramakrishna partly regained outer consciousness. The musician
improvised:

> *Why should one who, for Thy sake, has given up everything Endure so
> much of suffering?*

The Master bowed to the musician and sat down to listen to the music.
Now and then he became abstracted.

When the musician stopped singing, Sri Ramakrishna began to talk to the
devotees.

**Prema**

MASTER (to Vijay and the others): \"What is prema? He who feels it, this
intense and ecstatic love of God, not only forgets the world but forgets
even the body, which is so dear to all. Chaitanya experienced it.\"

The Master explained this to the devotees by singing a song describing
the ecstatic state of prema:

> *Oh, when will dawn the blessed day*
>
> *When tears of joy will flow from my eyes*
>
> *As I repeat Lord Hari\'s name? . . .*

The Master began to dance, and the devotees joined him. He caught M. by
the arm and dragged him into the circle. Thus dancing, Sri Ramakrishna
again went into samādhi. Standing transfixed, he looked like a picture
on canvas.

Kedār repeated the following hymn to bring his mind down from the plane
of samādhi:

> *We worship the Brahman-Consciousness in the Lotus of the Heart,*
>
> *The Undifferentiated, who is adored by Hari, Hara, and Brahma;*
>
> *Who is attained by yogis in the depths of their meditation;*
>
> *The Scatterer of the fear of birth and death,*
>
> *The Essence of Knowledge and Truth, the Primal Seed of the world.*

Sri Ramakrishna gradually came back to the plane of normal
consciousness. He took his seat and chanted the names of God: \"Om
Satchidananda! Govinda! Govinda! Govinda! Yogamaya!
Bhagavata-Bhakta-Bhagavan!\"

The Master took dust from the place where the kirtan had been sung and
touched it to his forehead.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the semicircular porch
facing the Ganges, the devotees sitting by his side. Now and then the
Master would exclaim, \"Ah, Krishnachaitanya!\"

MASTER (to Vijay and the others): \"There has been much chanting of the
Lord\'s name in the room. That is why the atmosphere has become so
intense.\"

BHAVANATH: \"Words of renunciation, too.\"

The Master said, \"Ah, how thrilling!\" Then he sang about Gaurānga and
Nityananda :

> *Gora bestows the Nectar of prema;*
>
> *Jar after jar he pours it out,*
>
> *And still there is no end!*
>
> *Sweetest Nitai is summoning all;*
>
> *Beloved Gora bids them come;*
>
> *Shāntipur is almost drowned,*
>
> *And Nadia is flooded with prerna!*

**Strict rules for sannyasi\'s life**

MASTER (to Vijay and the others): \"The musician sang rightly: \'A
sannyasi must not look at a woman.\' This is the sannyasi\'s dharma.
What a lofty ideal!\"

VIJAY: \"Yes indeed, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Others learn from the sannyasi\'s example. That is why such
strict rules are prescribed for him. A sannyasi must not look even at
the portrait of a woman. What a strict rule! The slaughtering of a black
goat is prescribed for the worship of the Divine Mother; but a goat with
even a slight wound cannot be offered. A sannyasi must not only not have
intercourse with woman; he must not even talk to her\"

VIJAY: \"Young Haridas talked with a pious woman. For that reason
Chaitanya banished him from his presence.\"

MASTER: \"A sannyasi associated with \'woman and gold\' is like a
beautiful damsel with a bad odour. The odour makes her beauty useless.

\"Once a Mārwāri devotee wanted to give me some money. Mathur wanted to
deed me some land. But I couldn\'t accept either.

\"The rules for the life of a sannyasi are very strict indeed. If a man
takes the garb of a sannyasi, he must act exactly like one. Haven\'t you
noticed in the theatre that the man who takes the part of the king acts
like a king, and the man who takes the part of a minister acts like a
minister?

\"But on attaining the state of the paramahamsa one becomes like a
child. A child five years old doesn\'t know the difference between a man
and a woman. But even a paramahamsa must be careful, so as not to set a
bad example to others.\"

Referring to Keshab\'s association with \"woman and gold\", which had
hindered his work as a spiritual teacher, Sri Ramakrishna said to Vijay,
\"He-do you understand?\"

VIJAY: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"He couldn\'t achieve very much because he wanted to satisfy
both God and the world.\"

VIJAY: \"Chaitanya said to Nityananda: \'Nitai, I shall not be able to
do the people any good unless I renounce the world. All will imitate me
and want to lead the life of a householder. No one will try to direct
his whole mind to the Lotus Feet of God, renouncing \"woman and gold.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. Chaitanyadeva renounced the world to set an example to
mankind.

**The sannyasi is a world teacher**

\"The sannyasi must renounce \'woman and gold\' for his own welfare.
Even if he is unattached, and consequently not in danger, still, in
order to set an example to others, he must not keep \'woman and gold\'
near him. The sannyasi, the man of renunciation, is a world teacher. It
is his example that awakens the spiritual consciousness of men.\"

It was nearly dusk. The devotees saluted the Master and took their
leave.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 23**

FESTIVAL AT SURENDRA\'S HOUSE

> Sunday, June 15, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA arrived in the morning at the garden house of Surendra,
one of his beloved householder disciples, in the village of Kankurgachi
near Calcutta. Surendra had invited him and a large number of the
devotees to a religious festival.

Occasions like this were a source of great happiness and rejoicing to
the Master\'s devotees. He was then seen at his best. He joined with the
others in devotional music and in chanting the names of God, frequently
going into ecstasy. He poured out his entire soul in inspired talk,
explaining the various phases of God-Consciousness. The impressions of
such a festival lingered in the minds of all for many days.

The devotees stood in rows inside the big hall of the garden house to
hear the music sung by the professional singers. The floor of the room
was covered with a carpet over which was spread a white sheet; a few
bolsters, pillows, and cushions lay here and there.

**Krishna and Gopis at Vrindāvan**

The musicians were singing of the episodes in the life of Sri Krishna
especially associated with His divine love for the gopis of Vrindāvan.
This was a theme which always appealed to the Master and would throw him
into ecstatic moods.

Krishna, God Incarnate, lived the years of His boyhood in Vrindāvan as a
cowherd. He tended His cows on the green meadows along the bank of the
Jamuna and played His flute. The milkmaids could not resist the force of
His divine attraction. At the sound of His flute they would leave their
household duties and go to the bank of the sacred river. Their love for
Krishna destroyed their attachment to worldly things. Neither the
threats of their relatives nor the criticism of others could make them
desist from seeking the company of Krishna. In the love of the gopis for
Krishna there was not the slightest trace of worldliness. It was the
innate attraction of God for pure souls, as of the magnet for iron. The
author of the Bhagavata has compared this love to the all-consuming love
of a woman for her beloved. Before the on rush of that love all barriers
between man and God are swept away. The devotee surrenders himself
completely to his Divine Beloved and in the end becomes one with Him.

Radha was the foremost of the gopis, and Krishna\'s chief playmate. She
felt an indescribable longing for union with Him. A moment\'s separation
from Krishna would rend her heart and soul.

During many a moonlit night Krishna would dance with Radha and the gopis
in the sacred groves of Vrindāvan, and on such occasions the gopis would
experience the highest religious ecstasy. At the age of eleven Krishna
was called to be the king of Mathura. He left the gopis, promising them,
however, His divine vision whenever they concentrated on Him in their
hearts.

For centuries and centuries the lovers of God in 1ndia have been
worshipping the Divine by recreating in themselves the yearning of the
gopis for Krishna. Many of the folk-songs of India have as their theme
this sweet episode of Krishna\'s life. Sri Chaitanya revived this phase
of Hindu religious life by his spiritual practice and his divine
visions. In his ecstatic music Chaitanya assumed the role of Radha and
manifested the longing to be united with Krishna. For a long period Sri
Ramakrishna also worshipped God as his beloved Krishna, looking on
himself as one of the gopis or as God\'s handmaid.

At Surendra\'s garden house the kirtan had begun early in the morning.
The musicians were singing about the love of Krishna and Radha for each
other. The Master was frequently in samādhi. The room was crowded with
devotees, among them Bhavanath, Niranjan, Rākhāl , Surendra, Ram, and
M., and many members of the

Brahmo Samaj.

In accordance with the custom, the kirtan had begun with, an
introductory song about Gaurānga.

Gaurānga embraces monastic life. He is being consumed with longing for a
vision of Krishna. He leaves Navadvip and goes away as a wandering monk
to seek out his Beloved. His devotees, unable to bear the pangs of
separation, weep bitterly and beg Gaurānga to return.

The musician sang:

> *對* *O Gaur, come back to Nadia!*

**Master\'s ecstasy**

Next the musician sang about the anguish of Radha at her separation from
Krishna. When Sri Ramakrishna heard the song he suddenly stood up.
Assuming the mood of Radha, he sang in a voice laden with sorrow,
improvising the words: \"O friend, either bring my beloved Krishna here
or take me to Him.\" Thus singing, he completely lost himself in Radha
and could not continue the song. He became speechless, his body
motionless, his eyes half closed, his mind totally unconscious of the
outer world. He was in deep samādhi.

**Radha\'s anguish at separation from Krishna**

After a long time he regained normal consciousness and said in the same
heart-rending voice: \"O friend, take me to my beloved Krishna and make
me your bondslave. I shall be your handmaid for ever. O friend, it was
you who taught me how to love Krishna. O Krishna! O Beloved of my
soul!\"

The professional musicians continued their song. They took the part of
Radha and sang as if she were talking

to her friend: *\"O friend, I shall not go again to the Jamuna to draw
water. Once I beheld my beloved Friend under the kadamba tree. Whenever
I pass it I am overwhelmed.\"*

The Master again became abstracted. Heaving a deep sigh he said, \"Ah
me! Ah me!\"

The song went on. Radha says:

> *Even the desire for Krishna\'s presence*
>
> *Has cooled and refreshed my feverish body.*

Now and then, the musicians improvised lines to the music, continuing in
the attitude of Radha:

> *\"O friends, you can wait. Show me Krishna, my Beloved.\"*

Again: *\"Do not bother about my ornaments. I have lost my most precious
Ornament.\"*

And again: *\"Alas! I have fallen on evil days. My happy days are
over.\"* And finally: *\"This unhappy time lingers so long!\"*

Sri Ramakrishna improvised a line himself: *\"Are not better times yet
in sight for me?\"* The musicians then

improvised: *\"Such a long time has passed! Are not better times yet in
sight for me?\"*

The musicians sang Radha\'s words to a friend:

> *O friend, I am dying! Surely I die.*
>
> *The anguish of being kept apart*
>
> *From Krishna is more than I can bear.*
>
> *Alas! to whom then shall I leave.*
>
> *My priceless Treasure? When I am dead,*
>
> *I beg you, do not burn my body;*
>
> *Do not cast it into the river.*
>
> *See that it is not given to the flames;*
>
> *Do not cast it into the water.*
>
> *In this body I played with Krishna.*
>
> *Bind my lifeless form, I beg you,*
>
> *To the black tamala\'s branches;*
>
> *Tie it to the tamala tree.*
>
> *Touching tamala it touches black.*
>
> *Krishna is black, and black is tamala;*
>
> *Black is the colour that I love.*
>
> *From earliest childhood I have loved it.*
>
> *To the black Krishna my body belongs;*
>
> *Let it not lie apart from black!*

Radha reaches her last extremity. She faints away.

> *Radha has fallen to the ground;*
>
> *She lies there lost to outward sense,*
>
> *Repeating her precious Krishna\'s name,*
>
> *And straightway doses both her eyes.*
>
> *Ah, has the drama reached its end?*
>
> *What ails you, O delight of Krishna?*
>
> *Only a moment ago you spoke.*
>
> *Her friends, anointing Radha\'s form*
>
> *With cool and soothing sandal-paste,*
>
> *Attempt to bring her back to earth.*
>
> *Some of them weep in bitter grief;*
>
> *They cannot bear to see her die.*
>
> *Some sprinkle water on her face;*
>
> *Perhaps she will revive again!*
>
> *But, oh, can water give back life*
>
> *To one who dies of Krishna\'s love?*

Radha\'s friends chant Krishna\'s sweet name in her ears. This brings
her back to partial consciousness. She looks at the black tamala tree
and thinks that Krishna stands before her.

> *Krishna\'s name restores her life;*
>
> *Once more her two eyes gaze around,*
>
> *But Krishna\'s face she cannot see.*
>
> *Alas, how bitterly she weeps!*
>
> *\"Where is my Krishna? Where is He*
>
> *Whose name you chanted in my ears?*
>
> *Bring Him but once before me here!\"*
>
> *Seeing the black tamala tree,*
>
> *She stares at it and cries aloud:*
>
> *\"There is His crest! I see it clearly!*
>
> *There is my \"Krishna\'s lovely crest!\"*
>
> *But only a peacock did she see,*
>
> *Whose glistening feathers she mistook*
>
> *For the gay feather on Krishna\'s crest.*

Krishna has gone to Mathura to assume His royal duties. He has discarded
His cowherd\'s dress and flute and put on the royal regalia. Radha\'s
friends, after a hurried consultation, send a gopi to Mathura as
messenger. She meets a woman of that city, of her own age, who asks her
where she comes from.

Radha\'s friend says: \"I don\'t have to call Krishna. He Himself will
come to me.\" But none the less, she follows the woman of Mathura and
goes to Krishna\'s palace. In the street she weeps overcome with grief,
and prays to Krishna: \"O Hari, where are You? O Life of the gopis! O
Enchanter of our hearts! O Beloved of Radha! O Hari, Remover of Your
devotees\' shame! Come to us once more! With great pride I said to the
people of Mathura that You Yourself would come to me. Please do not
humiliate me.\"

In scorn says the woman of Mathura:

> *\"Oh, you are only a simple milkmaid!*
>
> *How can you go to see our King,*
>
> *Our Krishna, in your beggar\'s rags?*
>
> *Behind seven doors His chamber stands.*
>
> *You cannot enter. How can you go?*
>
> *I die of shame to see your boldness.*
>
> *Tell me, how will you manage to enter?\"*

Says the gopi:

> *\"Krishna! Beloved!*
>
> *Soul of the gopis! Oh, where are You?*
>
> *Come to me here and save my life.*
>
> *Where are You, adorable Soul of the gopis?*
>
> *Come to me, Lord of Mathura!*
>
> *And save the life of Your sorrowing handmaid.*
>
> *Ah, where are You, Beloved of Radha?*
>
> *Lord of our hearts and Friend of our souls!*
>
> *O Hari, Destroyer of our shame!*
>
> *O priceless Treasure of the gopis!*
>
> *Come to Your handmaid and save her honour.\"*

Thus the messenger weeps and cries out for Krishna.

When the musicians sang, *\"Where are You, adorable Soul of the
gopis?\"* the Master went into samādhi. As the music neared its end the
musicians sang louder. Sri Ramakrishna was on his feet, again in deep
samādhi. Regaining partial consciousness, he said in a half articulate
voice, \"Kitna! Kitna!\" He was too much overwhelmed to utter Krishna\'s
name distinctly.

The kirtan was coming to a close. At the reunion of Radha and Krishna
the Master sang with the musicians, composing the lines himself:

> *Behold, there Radha stands by Krishna;*
>
> *On His bosom she reclines.*
>
> *Behold her standing at His left,*
>
> *Like a golden creeper twining*
>
> *Round a black tamala tree!*

As the music came to a close the Master led the chorus. All chanted
together, to the accompaniment of drums and cymbals: \"Victory to Radha
and Krishna! Hallowed be the names of Radha and Krishna!\" The devotees
felt a surge of divine emotion and danced around the Master. He too
danced in an ecstasy of joy. The names of God echoed and reechoed in the
house and garden.

**Master\'s praise of Niranjan**

After the music the Master sat with the devotees. Just then Niranjan
arrived and prostrated himself before him.

At the very sight of this beloved disciple the Master stood up; with
beaming eyes and smiling face, and said:

\"You have come too! (To M.) You see, this boy is absolutely guileless.
One cannot be guileless without a great deal of spiritual discipline in
previous births. A hypocritical and calculating mind can never attain
God.

\"Don\'t you see that God incarnates Himself only in a family where
innocence exists? How guileless Dasaratha was! So was Nanda, Krishna\'s
father. There is a saying: \'Ah, how innocent a man he is!

He is just like Nanda.\'

(To Niranjan) \"I feel as if a dark veil has covered your face. It is
because you have accepted a job in an office. One must keep accounts
there. Besides, one must attend to many other things, and that always
keeps the mind in a state of worry. You are serving in an office like
other worldly people; but there is a slight difference, in that you are
earning money for the sake of your mother. One must show the highest
respect to one\'s mother, for she is the very embodiment of the Blissful
Mother of the Universe. If you had accepted the job for the sake of wife
and children, I should have said: \'Fie upon you! Shame! A thousand
shames!\'

(To Mani Mallick, pointing to Niranjan) \"Look at this boy. He is
absolutely guileless. But he has one fault: he is slightly untruthful
nowadays. The other day he said that he would visit me again very soon,
but he didn\'t come. (To Niranjan) That is why Rākhāl asked you why you
didn\'t come to see me while you were at Ariadaha, so near
Dakshineswar.\"

NIRANJAN: \"I was there only a couple of days.\"

MASTER (to Niranjan, pointing to M.) \"He is the headmaster of a school.
At my bidding he went to see you. (To M.) Did you send Baburam to me the
other day?\"

The Master went to an adjoining room and began to talk with some
devotees there.

**Be mad for God alone**

MASTER (to M.): \"Ah! How wonderful was the yearning of the gopis for
Krishna! They were seized with divine madness at the very sight of the
black tamala tree. Separation from Krishna created such a fire of
anguish in Radha\'s heart that it dried up even the tears in her eyes!
Her tears would disappear in steam. There were other times when nobody
could notice the depth of her feeling. People do not notice the plunge
of an elephant in a big lake.\"

1.  \"Yes, sir, that is true. Chaitanya, too, experienced a similar
    feeling. He mistook a forest for the sacred grove of Vrindāvan, and
    the dark water of the ocean for the blue Jamuna\"

MASTER: \"Ah! If anyone has but a particle of such prema! What yearning!
What love! Radha possessed not only one hundred per cent of divine love,
but one hundred and twenty-five per cent.

This is what it means to be intoxicated with ecstatic love of God. The
sum and substance of the whole matter is that a man must love God, must
be restless for Him. It doesn\'t matter whether you believe in God with
form or in God without form. You may or may not believe that God
incarnates Himself as man. But you will realize Him if you have that
yearning. Then He Himself will let you know what He is like. If you must
be mad, why should you be mad for the things of the world? If you must
be mad, be mad for God alone.\"

Presently Sri Ramakrishna returned to the main hall of the house. A big
pillow was placed near him for his use. Before touching it he said, \"Om
Tat Sat\" Perhaps the pillow had been used by many worldly people, and
that was why he purified it in this way. Bhavanath, M., and other
devotees sat near him. It was getting late, but there was no indication
that the meal was going to be served. The Master became impatient, like
a child, and said: \"I don\'t see any sign of food.

What\'s the matter? Where is Narendra?\"

A DEVOTEE (with a smile): \"Sir, Ram Babu is the manager of the feast.
He is superintending everything.\"

MASTER (laughing): \"Oh, Ram is the manager! Then we know what to
expect.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Things like this always happen when he is the supervisor.\"
(All laugh.)

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Where is Surendra? What a nice disposition
he has now! He is very outspoken; he isn\'t afraid to speak the truth.
He is unstinting in his liberality. No one that goes to him for help
comes away empty-handed. (To M.) You went to Bhagavan Das. What sort of
man is he?\"

1.  \"He is very old now. I saw him at Kalna. It was night. He lay on a
    carpet and a devotee fed him with food that had been offered to God.
    He can hear only if one speaks loudly into his ear.

Hearing me mention your name he said, \'You have nothing to worry
about.\'\"

BHAVANATH (to M.): \"You haven\'t been to Dakshineswar for a long time.
The Master asked me about you and said one day, \'Has M. lost all taste
for this place?\' \"

Bhavanath laughed as he said these words. The Master heard their
conversation and said to M. in a loving voice: \"Yes, that is true. Why
haven\'t you been to Dakshineswar for such a long time?\"

M. could only stammer some lame excuses.

Just then Mahimacharan arrived. He lived at Cossipore near Calcutta.
Mahimacharan held the Master in great respect and was a frequent visitor
at the temple garden. He was a man of independent means, having
inherited some ancestral property. He devoted his time to religious
thought and to the study of the scriptures. He was a man of some
scholarship, having studied many books, both Sanskrit and English.

MASTER (to Mahima): \"What is this? I see a steamship here. (All laugh.)
We expect here a small boat at the most, but a real steamship has
arrived. But then I know. It\'s the rainy season!\" (Laughter.)

The Master was conversing with Mahimacharan. He asked him: \"Isn\'t
feeding people a kind of service to God? God exists in all beings as
fire. To feed people is to offer oblations to that Indwelling Spirit.
But then one shouldn\'t feed the wicked, I mean people who are entangled
in gross worldliness or who have committed heinous crimes like adultery.
Even the ground where such people sit becomes impure to a depth of seven
cubits. Once Hriday fed a number of people at his native place. A good
many of them were wicked. I said to Hriday: \'Look here. If you feed
such people I shall leave your house at once.\' (To Mahima) I hear that
you used to feed people; but now you don\'t give any such feasts. Is it
because your expenses have gone up?\" (Laughter.)

The meal was to be served on the south verandah of the house.
Leaf-plates were being placed on the floor. The Master said to
Mahimacharan: \"Please go there and see what they are doing. You may
help them a little in serving the food. But I shouldn\'t ask you.\"
Mahimacharan said: \"Let them bring in the food. I shall see.\" Hemming
and hawing, he went toward the kitchen, but presently he came back.

Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees enjoyed the meal greatly. Afterwards he
rested awhile. About two o\'clock in the afternoon Pratap Chandra
Mazumdar of the Brahmo Samaj arrived. He was a co-worker of Keshab
Chandra Sen and had been to Europe and America in connection with the
Brahmo missionary work. He greeted Sri Ramakrishna, and the Master, too,
bowed before him with his usual modesty.

They were soon engaged in conversation.

PRATAP: \"I have been to Darjeeling recently for a change of air.\"

MASTER: \"But your health hasn\'t much improved. What are you suffering
from?\"

PRATAP: \"The same-illness that Keshab died of.\"

They began to talk about Keshab. Pratap said: \"Even in boyhood he
showed non-attachment to worldly things, seldom making merry with other
boys. He was a student in the Hindu College. At that time he became
friendly with Satyendra and through him made the acquaintance of his
father, Devendranath Tagore. Keshab cultivated bhakti and at the same
time practised meditation. At times he would be so much overcome with
divine love that he would become unconscious. The main purpose of his
life was to introduce religion among householders.

The conversation next turned to a certain Marhatta lady.

PRATAP: \"Some women of our country have been to England. This Marhatta
lady, who is very scholarly, also visited England. Later she embraced
Christianity. Have you heard her name, sir?\"

**Egotism brings calamity**

MASTER: \"No. But from what you say it seems to me that she has a desire
for name and fame. That kind of egotism is not good. The feeling \'I am
the doer\' is the outcome of ignorance. But the feeling that God does
everything is due to knowledge. God alone is the Doer; all others are
mere instruments in His hands.

**Parable of the calf**

\"The misfortune that befalls a man on account of his egotism can be
realized if you only think of the condition of the calf. The calf says,
\'Hamma! Hamma!\' that is, \'I! I!\' And just look at its misfortune! At
times it is yoked to the plough and made to work in the field from sunup
to sundown, rain or shine. Again, it may be slaughtered by the butcher.
In that case the flesh is eaten and the skin tanned into hide. From the
hide shoes are made. People put on these shoes and walk on the rough
ground. Still that is not the end of its misfortunes. Drums are made
from its skin and mercilessly beaten with sticks. At last its entrails
are made into strings for the bow used in carding cotton. When used by
the carder the string gives the sound \'Tuhu! Tuhu!\', \'Thou!
Thou!\'-that is, \'It is Thou, O Lord! It is Thou!\' It no longer says,
\'Hamma! Hamma!\', \'I! I!\' Only then does the calf\'s trouble come to
an end, and it is liberated. It doesn\'t return to the world of action.

\"Likewise, when the embodied soul says: \'O God, I am not the doer;
Thou art the Doer. I am the machine and Thou art its Operator\', only
then does its suffering of worldly life come to an end; only then does
it obtain liberation. It no longer has to be reborn in this world of
action.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"How can a man get rid of his ego?\"

MASTER: \"You cannot get rid of it until you have realized God. If you
find a person free from ego, then know for certain that he has seen
God.\"

**Signs of God-vision**

DEVOTEE: \"What, sir, are the signs of God-vision?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, there are such signs. It is said in the Bhagavata that a
man who has seen God behaves sometimes like a child, sometimes like a
ghoul, sometimes like an inert thing, and sometimes like a madman.

\"The man who has seen God becomes like a child. He is beyond the three
gunas; he is unattached to any of them. He behaves like a ghoul, for he
maintains the same attitude toward things holy and unholy. Again, like a
madman, he sometimes laughs and sometimes weeps. Now he dresses himself
like a dandy and the next moment he goes entirely naked and roams about
with his cloth under his arm. Therefore he seems to be a lunatic. Again,
at times he sits motionless like an inert thing.\"

**Harmless ego**

DEVOTEE: \"Does the ego disappear altogether after the realization of
God?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, sometimes God totally effaces the ego of His devotee, as
in the state of samādhi.

But in many cases He keeps a trace of ego. But that doesn\'t injure
anybody. It is like the ego of a child. A five-year-old child no doubt
says \'I\', but that ego doesn\'t harm anybody. At the touch of the
philosopher\'s stone, steel is turned into gold; the steel sword becomes
a sword of gold.

The gold sword has the form of a sword, no doubt, but it cannot injure
anybody. One cannot cut anything with a gold sword.

(To Pratap) \"You have been to England. Tell us what you saw there.\"

PRATAP: \"The English people worship what you call \'gold\'. Of course,
there are also some good people in England, those who live an unattached
life. But generally one finds there a great display of rajas in
everything. I saw the same thing in America.\"

**Secret of work**

MASTER (to Pratap): \"It is not in England alone that one sees
attachment to worldly things. You see it everywhere. But remember that
work is only the first step in spiritual life. God cannot be realized
without sattva-love, discrimination, kindness, and so on. It is the very
nature of rajas to involve a man in many worldly activities. That is why
rajas degenerates into tamas. If a man is entangled in too many
activities he surely forgets God. He becomes more and more attached to
\'woman and gold\'.

\"But it is not possible for you to give up work altogether. Your very
nature will lead you to it whether you like it or not. Therefore the
scriptures ask you to work in a detached spirit, that is to say, not to
crave the work\'s results. For example, you may perform devotions and
worship, and practise austerities, but your aim is not to earn people\'s
recognition or to increase your merit.

\"To work in such a spirit of detachment is known as karmayoga. But it
is very difficult. We are living in the Kaliyuga, when one easily
becomes attached to one\'s actions. You may think you are working in a
detached spirit, but attachment creeps into the mind from nobody knows
where. You may worship in the temple or arrange a grand religious
festival or feed many poor and starving people. You may think you have
done all this without hankering after the results. But unknown to
yourself the desire for name and fame has somehow crept into your mind.
Complete detachment from the results of action is possible only for one
who has seen God.\"

**The path of bhakti for this age**

A DEVOTEE: \"Then what is the way for those who have not seen God? Must
they give up all the duties of the world?\"

MASTER: \"The best path for this age is bhaktiyoga, the path of bhakti
prescribed by Nārada: to sing the name and glories of God and pray to
Him with a longing heart, \'O God, give me knowledge, give me devotion,
and reveal Thyself to me!\' The path of karma is extremely difficult.
Therefore one should pray: \'O God, make my duties fewer and fewer; and
may I, through Thy grace, do the few duties that Thou givest me without
any attachment to their results! May I have no desire to be involved in
many activities!\'

\"It is not possible to give up work altogether. Even to think or to
meditate is a kind of work.

As you develop love for God, your worldly activities become fewer and
fewer of themselves. And you lose all interest in them. Can one who has
tasted a drink made of sugar candy enjoy a drink made of ordinary
molasses?\"

**First God and then worldly duties**

A DEVOTEE: \"The English people always exhort us to be active. Isn\'t
action the aim of life then?\"

MASTER: \"The aim of life is the attainment of God. Work is only a
preliminary step; it can never be the end.

Even unselfish work is only a means; it is not the end.

\"Sambhu Mallick once said to me, \'Please bless me, sir, that I may
spend all my money for good purposes, such as building hospitals and
dispensaries; making roads, and digging wells.\' I said to him: \'It
will be good if you can do these things in a spirit of detachment. But
that is very difficult. Whatever you may do, you must always remember
that the aim of this life of yours is the attainment of God and not the
building of hospitals and dispensaries. Suppose God appeared before you
and said to you, \"Accept a boon from Me.\" Would you then ask Him, \"O
God, build me some hospitals and dispensaries\"? Or would you not rather
pray to Him: \"O God, may I have pure love at Your Lotus Feet! May I
have Your uninterrupted vision!\"? Hospitals, dispensaries, and all such
things are unreal. God alone is real and all else unreal. Furthermore,
after realizing God one feels that He alone is the Doer and we are but
His instruments. Then why should we forget Him and destroy ourselves by
being involved in too many activities? After realizing Him, one may,
through His grace, become His instrument in building many hospitals and
dispensaries.\'

\"Therefore I say again that work is only the first step. It can never
be the goal of life. Devote yourself to spiritual practice and go
forward. Through practice you will advance more and more in the path of
God. At last you will come to know that God alone is real and all else
is illusory, and that the goal of life is the attainment of God.

**The story of the wood-cutter**

\"Once upon a time a wood-cutter went into a forest to chop wood. There
suddenly he met a brahmachari. The holy man said to him, \'My good man,
go forward.\' On returning home the wood-cutter asked himself, \'Why did
the brahmachari tell me to go forward?\' Some time passed. One day he
remembered the brahmachari\'s words. He said to himself, \'Today I shall
go deeper into the forest.\' Going deep into the forest, he discovered
innumerable sandal-wood trees. He was very happy and returned with
cart-loads of sandal-wood. He sold them in the market and became very
rich.

\"A few days later he again remembered the words of the holy man to go
forward. He went deeper into the forest and discovered a silver-mine
near a river. This was even beyond his dreams. He dug out silver from
the mine and sold it in the market. He got so much money that he didn\'t
even know how much he had.

\"A few more days passed. One day he thought: \'The brahmachari didn\'t
ask me to stop at the silver-mine; he told me to go forward.\' This time
he went to the other side of the river and found a gold-mine. Then he
exclaimed: \'Ah, just see! This is why he asked me to go forward.\'

\"Again, a few days afterwards, he went still deeper into the forest and
found heaps of diamonds and other precious gems. He took these also and
became as rich as the god of wealth himself.

**Go forward**

\"Therefore I say that, whatever you may do, you will find better and
better things if only you go forward. You may feel a little ecstasy as
the result of japa, but don\'t conclude from this that you have achieved
everything in spiritual life. Work is by no means the goal of life. Go
forward, and then you will be able to perform unselfish work. But again
I say that it is most difficult to perform unselfish work. Therefore
with love and longing in your heart pray to God: \'O God, grant me
devotion at Thy Lotus Feet and reduce my worldly duties. Please grant me
the boon that the few duties I must do may be done in a detached
spirit.\' If you go still farther you will realize God.

You will see Him. In time you will converse with Him.\"

Next the conversation turned to the quarrels among the members of the
Brahmo Samaj. They had had a misunderstanding about the right to preach
in the temple after Keshab\'s death.

MASTER (to Pratap): \"I hear that some members of the Samaj have
quarrelled with you about the altar. But they are most insignificant
persons-mere nobodies.

(To the devotees): \"People like Pratap and Amrita are like good
conchshells, which give out a loud sound. And the rest, about whom you
hear so much, don\'t give out any sound at all.\" (All laugh.)

PRATAP: \"Speaking of sounds, even such a worthless thing as a
mangostone makes a sound!\"

MASTER (to Pratap): \"One can very well understand the inner feeling of
a teacher of your Brahmo Samaj by hearing his preaching. Once I went to
a meeting of a Hari Sabha. The preacher of the day was a pundit named
Samadhyayi. And can you imagine what he said? He said in the course of
his sermon: \'God is dry. We must make Him sweet and fresh with our love
and devotion.\' I was stunned to hear these words. Then I was reminded
of a story. A boy once said: \'At my uncle\'s house there are many
horses. Oh, yes! His whole cow-shed is full of them.\' Now if it was
really a cow-shed, then horses could not be kept there. Possibly he had
only cows. What did people think on hearing such an incoherent
statement? They believed that there were surely no such animals as
horses in the shed.\" (Laughter.)

A DEVOTEE: \"True, sir, there were not only no horses, but possibly
there were also no cows!\"

(Laughter.)

MASTER: \"Just fancy, to describe God, who is of the very nature of Love
and Bliss, as dry! It only proves that the man has never experienced
what God is like.

**Master\'s advice to Pratap**

(To Pratap) \"Let me tell you something. You are a learned and
intelligent and serious-minded soul. Keshab and you were like the two
brothers, Gaur and Nitai. You have had enough of lectures, arguments,
quarrels,discussions, and dissensions. Can such things interest you any
more? Now gather your whole mind and direct it to God. Plunge deep into
God.\"

PRATAP: \"Yes, sir, you are right. That is surely my only duty now. But
I am doing all these things only to perpetuate Keshab\'s name.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"No doubt you say now that you are doing all
this to keep his name alive; but in a few days you won\'t feel that way.
Listen to a story. A man had built a house on a hill.

It was only a mud hut, but he had built it with great labour. A few days
after, there came a violent storm and the hut began to rock. The man
became very anxious to save it and prayed to the god of the winds,\'O
god of the winds, please don\'t wreck the house!\' But the god of the
winds paid no heed to his prayer. The house was about to crash. Then he
thought of a trick. He remembered that Hanuman was the son of the god of
the winds. At once he cried out with great earnestness: \'O revered sir,
please don\'t pull down the house. It belongs to Hanuman. I beseech you
to protect it.\' But still the house continued to shake violently.
Nobody seemed to listen to his prayer. He repeated many times, \'Oh,
this house belongs to Hanuman!\' But the fury of the wind did not abate.
Then he remembered that Hanuman was the devoted servant of Rāma, whose
younger brother was Lakshmana. Desperately the man prayed, crying aloud,
\'Oh, this house belongs to Lakshmana!\' But that also failed to help
matters. So the man cried out as a last resort: \'This is Rāma\'s house.
Don\'t break it down, O god of the winds! I beseech you most humbly.\'
But this too proved futile, and the house began to crash down. Whereupon
the man, who now had to save his own life, rushed out of it with the
curse: \'Let it go! This is the devil\'s own hut!\'

(To Pratap): \"You don\'t have to perpetuate Keshab\'s name. Remember
that he achieved all his success through the will of God. Through the
divine will his work was established, and through the divine will it is
disintegrating. What can you do about it? Now it is your bounden duty to
give your entire mind to God, to plunge deep into the Ocean of His
Love.\"

Saying these words the Master sang in his sweet voice:

> *Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God\'s Beauty; If you
> descend to the uttermost depths, There you will find the gem of Love.*
>
> *Go seek, O mind, go seek Vrindāvan in your heart,*
>
> *Where with His loving devotees*
>
> *Sri Krishna sports eternally.*
>
> *Light up, O mind, light up true wisdom\'s shining lamp,*
>
> *And let it burn with steady flame*
>
> *Unceasingly within your heart.*
>
> *Who is it that steers your boat across the solid earth?*
>
> *It is your guru, says Kubir;*
>
> *Meditate on his holy feet.*

The Master continued, addressing Pratap: \"Did you listen to the song?
You have had enough of lectures and quarrels. Now dive deep into the
Ocean of God. There is no fear of death from plunging into this Ocean,
for this is the Ocean of Immortality. Don\'t think that this will make
you lose your head. Never for a moment harbour the idea that by thinking
too much of God one becomes insane. Once I said to Narendra\"

PRATAP: \"Who is Narendra, sir?\"

MASTER: \"Oh, never mind. There is a young man of that name. I said to
Narendra: \'Look here, my boy. God is the Ocean of Bliss; Don\'t you
want to plunge into this Ocean? Suppose there is a cup of syrup and you
are a fly. Where will you sit to sip the syrup?\' Narendra said, \'I
will sit on the edge of the cup and stick my head out to drink it.\'
\'Why?\' said I. \'Why should you sit on the edge?\' He replied, \'If I
go far into the syrup, I shall be drowned and lose my life.\' Then I
said

to him: \'But, my child, there is no such fear in the Ocean of
Satchidananda. It is the Ocean of Immortality. By plunging into it a man
does not die; he becomes immortal. Man does not lose his consciousness
by being mad about God.

**Knowledge and ignorance**

(To the devotees) \"The feeling of \'I \' and \'mine\' is ignorance.
People say that Rani Rasmani built the Kāli temple; but nobody says it
was the work of God. They say that such and such a person established
the Brahmo Samaj; but nobody says it was founded through the will of
God. This feeling, \'I am the doer\', is ignorance. On the contrary, the
idea, \'O God, Thou art the Doer and I am only an instrument; Thou art
the Operator and I am the machine\', is Knowledge. After attaining
Knowledge a man says: \'O God, nothing belongs to me-neither this house
of worship nor this Kāli temple nor this Brahmo Samaj. These are all
Thine. Wife, son, and family do not belong to me. They are all Thine.\'

\"To love these objects, regarding them as one\'s own, is māyā. But to
love all things is daya, compassion. To love only the members of the
Brahmo Samaj or of one\'s own family is māyā; to love one\'s own
countrymen is māyā. But to love the people of all countries, to love the
members of all religions, is daya. Such love comes from love of God,
from daya.

\"Māyā entangles a man and turns him away from God. But through daya one
realizes God. Sages like Sukadeva and Nārada always cherished daya in
their hearts.\"

PRATAP: \"Revered sir, are those who live with you making progress in
spiritual life?\"

MASTER: \"I tell people that there is nothing wrong in the life of the
world. But they must live in the world as a maidservant lives in her
master\'s house.\'

Referring to her master\'s house, she says, \'That is our house.\' But
her real home is perhaps in a far-away village. Pointing out her
master\'s house to others, she says, no doubt, \'This is our house\',
but in her heart she knows very well that it doesn\'t belong to her and
that her own house is in a faraway village. She brings up her master\'s
son and says, \'My Hari has grown very naughty\', or \'My Hari doesn\'t
like sweets.\' Though she repeats, \'My Hari\' with her lips, yet she
knows in her heart that Hari doesn\'t belong to her, that he is her
master\'s son.

\"Thus I say to those who visit me: \'Why don\'t you live in the world?
There is no harm in that.

But always keep your mind, on God. Know for certain that house, family
and property are not yours. They are God\'s. Your real home is in God.\'
Also I ask them to pray always with a longing heart for love of God\'s
Lotus Feet.\"

Again the conversation turned to the English people. A devotee said,
\"Sir, I understand that nowadays the pundits of England do not believe
in the existence of God.\"

PRATAP: \"However they may talk, I don\'t believe that any of them is a
real atheist. Many of them have had to admit that there is a great power
behind the activities of the universe.\"

MASTER: \"Well, that is enough. They believe in Śakti, don\'t they? Then
why should they be atheists?\"

PRATAP: \"They also believe in the moral government of the universe.\"

Pratap was now about to take leave of the Master.

MASTER (to Pratap): \"What more shall I say to you? My only request is
that you do not involve yourself in quarrels and dissensions any more.
Another thing. It is \'woman and gold\' that keeps men away from God.
That is the barrier. Don\'t you find that everyone has nothing but
praise for his own wife? (All laugh.) A wife may be good or bad; but if
you ask her husband about her he will always say, \'Oh, she is very
good-\'\"

At this point Pratap bade the Master good-bye. He did not wait to hear
the end of Sri Ramakrishna\'s words about the renunciation of \"woman
and gold\". Those burning words touched the hearts of the devotees and
were carried away on the wind through the gently rustling leaves in the
garden.

A few minutes later Mani Mallick said to Sri Ramakrishna: \"Sir, it is
time for you to leave for Dakshineswar. Today Keshab\'s mother and the
other ladies of his family are going to the temple garden to visit you.
They will be hurt if they do not find you there.\"

Keshab had passed away only a few months before. His old mother and his
other relatives wanted to visit the Master.

MASTER (to Mani Mallick): \"Don\'t hurry me, please. I didn\'t sleep
well. I can\'t rush. They are going to Dakshineswar. What am I to do
about it? They will stroll in the garden and enjoy it thoroughly.\"

After resting a little the Master was ready to leave for Dakshineswar.
He was thinking of Surendra\'s welfare. He visited the different rooms,
softly chanting the holy name of God.

Suddenly he stood still and said: \"I didn\'t eat any luchi at meal
time. Bring me a little now.\"

He ate only a crumb and said: \"There is much meaning in my asking for
the luchi. If I should remember that I hadn\'t eaten any at Surendra\'s
house, then I should want to come back for it.\"

(All laugh.)

MANI MALLICK: \"That would have been nice. Then we too should have come
with you.\"

The devotees laughed.

**Friday, June 20, 1884**

It was dusk. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room, absorbed in
contemplation of the Divine Mother. Now and then he was chanting Her
name. Rākhāl , Adhar, M., and several other devotees were with him.

After a while the evening worship began in the temples. Adhar left the
room to see the worship.

Sri Ramakrishna and M. conversed.

MASTER: \"Tell me, does Baburam intend to continue his studies? I said
to him, \'Continue your studies to set an example to others.\' After
Sita had been set free, Bibhishana refused to become king of Ceylon.
Rāma said to him: \'You should become king to open the eyes of the
ignorant.

Otherwise they will ask you what you have gained as a result of serving
Me. They will be pleased to see you acquire the kingdom.\'

**Baburam\'s spiritual nature**

\"I noticed the other day that Baburam, Bhavanath, and Harish have a
feminine nature. In a vision I saw Baburam as a goddess with a necklace
around her neck and with woman companions about her.

He has received something in a dream. His body is pure. Only a very
little effort will awaken his spiritual consciousness.

**Concerning Rākhāl**

\"You see, I am having some difficulty about my physical needs. It will
be nice if Baburam lives with me. The nature of these attendants of mine
is undergoing a change. Lātu is always tense with spiritual emotion. He
is about to merge himself in God. Rākhāl is getting into such a
spiritual mood that he can\'t do anything even for himself. I have to
get water for him. He isn\'t of much service to me.

\"Among the youngsters Baburam and Niranjan are rather exceptional. If
other boys come in the future, they will, it seems to me, receive
instruction and then go away.

\"But I don\'t want Baburam to tear himself away from his family. It may
make trouble at home.

(Smiling) When I ask him, \'Why don\'t you come?\' he says, \'Why not
make me come?\' He looks at Rākhāl and weeps. He says, \'Rākhāl is very
happy here.\'

\"Rākhāl now lives here as one of the family. I know that he will never
again be attached to the world. He says that worldly enjoyments have
become tasteless to him. His wife came here on her way to Konnagar. She
is fourteen. He too was asked to go to Konnagar, but he didn\'t go. He
said,

\'I don\'t like merriment and gaiety.\'

\"What do you think of Niranjan?\" M: \"He is very handsome.\"

**Niranjan\'s guilelessness**

MASTER: \"No, I am not asking about his looks. He is guileless. One can
easily realize God if one is free from guile. Spiritual instruction
produces quick results in a guileless heart. Such a heart is like well
cultivated land from which all the stones have been removed. No sooner
is the seed sown than it germinates. The fruit also appears quickly.

\"Niranjan will not marry. It is \'woman and gold\' that causes
entanglement. Isn\'t that so?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"What will one gain by renouncing betel-leaf and tobacco? The
real renunciation is the renunciation of \'woman and gold.\'

\"I came to know in an ecstatic mood that, though Niranjan had accepted
a job in an office, he would not be stained by it. He is earning money
for his mother. There is no harm in that.

\"The work you are doing won\'t injure you either. What you are doing

is good. Suppose a clerk is sent to jail; he is shut up there and
chained, and at last he is released. Does he cut capers after his
release? Of course not. He works again as a clerk. It is not your
intention to accumulate money. You only want to support your family.
Otherwise, where will they go?\"

1.  \"I shall be relieved if someone takes charge of them.\" MASTER:
    \"That is true. But now do \'this\' as well as \'that\' \"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"It is great luck to be able to renounce everything.\"

MASTER: \"That is true. But people act according to their inherent
tendencies. You have a few more duties to perform. After these are over
you will have peace. Then you will be released. A man cannot easily get
out of the hospital once his name is registered there. He is discharged
only when he is completely cured.

**Two classes of Master\'s devotees**

\"The devotees who come here may be divided into two groups. One group
says, \'O God, give me liberation.\' Another group, belonging to the
inner circle, doesn\'t talk that way. They are satisfied if they can
know two things: first, who I6 am; second, who they are and what their
relationship to me is. You belong to this second group; otherwise. . .

\"Bhavanath, Baburam, and a few others have a feminine nature. Harish
sleeps in a woman\'s cloth.

Baburam says that he too likes the womanly attitude. So I am right.
Bhavanath also is like that.

But Narendra, Rākhāl , and Niranjan have a masculine nature.

**Significance of the Master\'s injuring his arm**

\"Please tell me one thing. What is the significance of my having hurt
my arm? Once my teeth were broken while I was in a state of ecstasy. It
is the arm this time.\"

Seeing M. silent, the Master himself continued the conversation.

MASTER: \"My arm was broken in order to destroy my ego to its very root.
Now I cannot find my ego within myself any more. When I search for it I
see God alone. One can never attain God without completely getting rid
of the ego. You must have noticed that the chatak bird has its nest on
the ground but soars up very high.

\"Captain says I haven\'t acquired any occult powers because I eat fish.
I tremble with fear lest I should acquire those powers. If I should have
them, then this place would be turned into a hospital or a dispensary.
People would flock here and ask me to cure their illness. Is it good to
have occult powers?\"

1.  \"No, sir. You have said to us that a man cannot realize God if he
    possesses even one of the eight occult powers.\"

MASTER: \"Right you are. Only the small-minded seek them. If one asks
something of a rich man, one no longer receives any favour from him. The
rich man doesn\'t allow such a person to ride in the same carriage with
him. Even if he does, he doesn\'t allow the man to sit near him.
Therefore love without any selfish motive is best.

\"God with form and the formless God are both equally true. What do you
say? One cannot keep one\'s mind on the formless God a long time. That
is why God assumes form for His devotees.

\"Captain makes a nice remark in this connexion. He says that when a
bird gets tired of soaring very high it perches on a tree and rests.
First is the formless God, and then comes God with form.

\"I shall have to go to your house once. I saw in a vision that the
houses of Adhar, Balarām, and Surendra were so many places for our
forgathering. But it makes no difference to me whether they come here or
not.\"

1.  \"That\'s right. Why shouldn\'t it be so? One must feel misery if
    one feels happiness. But you are beyond both.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. Further, I think of the magician and his magic. The
magician alone is real. His magic is illusory, like a dream. I realized
this when I heard the Chandi recited. Sumbha and Nisumbha were scarcely
born when I learnt that they both were dead.\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. Once I was going to Kalna with Gangadhar in a steamer. A
    country boat struck our ship and sank with twenty or twenty-five
    passengers. They all disappeared in the water, like foam churned up
    by the steamer.

\"May I ask you one thing? Does a man watching magic really feel
compassion when he sees suffering in the performance? Does he feel, at
that time, any sense of responsibility? One thinks of compassion only
when one feels responsibility. Isn\'t that so?\"

**How a Jnāni looks on the illusory world**

MASTER: \"A Jnāni sees everything at once-God, māyā, the universe, and
living beings. He sees that Vidyā-māyā, Avidyā-māyā, the universe, and
all living beings exist and at the same time do not exist. As long as he
is conscious of \'I\', he is conscious of \'others\' too. Nothing
whatsoever exists after he cuts through the whole thing with the sword
of jnāna. Then even his \'I\' becomes as unreal as the magic of the
magician.\"

M. was reflecting on these words, when the Master said: \"Do you know
what it is like? It is as if there were a flower with twenty-five layers
of petals, and you cut them all with one stroke.

\"The idea of responsibility! Goodness gracious! Men like Sankaracharya
and Sukadeva kept the \'ego of Knowledge\'. It is not for man to show
compassion, but for God. One feels compassion as long as one has the
\'ego of Knowledge\'. And it is God Himself who has become the \'ego of
Knowledge\'.

**Supreme power of *Ādyāśakti* in the relative world**

\"You may feel a thousand times that it is all magic; but you are still
under the control of the Divine Mother.

You cannot escape Her. You are not free. You must do what She makes you
do. A man attains Brahmajnana only when it is given to him by the
*Ādyāśakti*, the Divine Mother. Then alone does he see the whole thing
as

magic; otherwise not.

\"As long as the slightest trace of ego remains, one lives within the
jurisdiction of the *Ādyāśakti*. One is under Her sway. One cannot go
beyond Her.

\"With the help of the *Ādyāśakti*, God sports as an Incarnation. God,
through His Śakti, incarnates Himself as man. Then alone does it become
possible for the Incarnation to carry on His work.

**Everything is due to the Śakti of the Divine Mother.**

\"When anyone asked the former manager of the temple garden a great
favour, the manager would say, \'Come after two or three days.\' He must
ask the proprietor\'s permission.

\"God will incarnate Himself as Kalki at the end of the Kaliyuga. He
will be born as the son of a brahmin.

Suddenly and unexpectedly a sword and horse will come to him. . . .\"

Adhar returned to the Master\'s room after watching the evening worship
in the temples.

MASTER (to Adhar and the others): \"Bhuvan was here and brought me
twenty-five Bombay mangoes and some sweets. She said to me, \'Will you
eat a mango?\' I said, \'My stomach is heavy today.\' And to tell you
the truth, I am feeling uncomfortable after eating a few of the
sweets.\"

Bhuvanmohini was a nurse who used to visit Sri Ramakrishna now and then.

The Master could not eat the food offerings of everyone, especially of
physicians and nurses. It was because they accepted money from the sick
in spite of the suffering of these people.

MASTER: \"Keshab Sen\'s mother, sisters, and other relatives came here;
so I had to dance a little.

I had to entertain them. What else could I do? They were so
grief-stricken!\"

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 24**

PUNDIT SHASHADHAR

> Wednesday, June 25, 1884

IT WAS THE DAY of the Rathyatra the Car Festival of the Hindus. At
Ishan\'s invitation Sri Ramakrishna went to

his house in Calcutta. For some time the Master had had a desire to meet
Pundit Shashadhar.

Tarkachudamani, who had been staying with one of Ishan\'s neighbours. So
it was decided that he would visit

the pundit in the afternoon.

A few devotees, including Hazra, accompanied the Master to Ishan\'s
house. Ishan had invited one or two brahmin scholars and a devotee who
followed the Tantrik method of worship. Shrish and Ishan\'s other sons
were also present.

The Master noticed that the Tantrik worshipper had a vermilion mark on
his forehead, and smilingly said, \"I see he is branded.\"

After a while M. and Narendra arrived and bowed before Sri Ramakrishna.
The Master had previously informed M. that he would be at Ishan\'s
house.

The Master joked about the delay in serving their meal. One of the
scholars quoted a Sanskrit verse about the anxiety created in people\'s
minds by the pangs of hunger. Proceeding to explain the verse he said:
\"The study of philosophy is indeed edifying, but poetry is more
fascinating than philosophy. People listening to good poems think of the
study of philosophy-Vedānta, Nyaya, Samkhya, and so forth as dry and
insipid. Again, music is more attractive than poetry. Music melts even a
heart of stone. But a beautiful woman has an even greater attraction for
a man\'s heart than music. Such a woman, passing by, diverts a man\'s
attention from both poetry and music. But when a man feels the pangs of
hunger, everything else poetry, music and woman appears as of no
consequence. Thus, hunger is the most arresting thing.\"

The Master remarked with a smile, \"The pundit is witty.\"

Soon Narendra began to sing. A few moments later the Master went
upstairs for a little rest. M. and Shrish accompanied him. M. introduced
Shrish to the Master, saying: \"He is a scholar and a man of peaceful
nature. We were fellow students in our boyhood. Now he is a lawyer.\"

MASTER: \"It is a pity that such a man should practise law.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. It was a mistake on his part.\"

MASTER: \"I know a few lawyers. One of them shows me great respect. He
is a straightforward man. (To Shrish) What is your idea about the most
essential thing in life?\"

SHRISH: \"God exists and He alone does everything. But the attributes we
ascribe to Him are not the right ones. How can a man canceive of Him?
His nature is infinite.\"

MASTER: \"What need is there of your counting the number of trees and
branches in an orchard? You have come to the orchard to eat mangoes. Do
that and be happy. The aim of human birth is to love God. Realize that
love and be at peace.

\"Suppose you have entered a tavern for a drink. Is it necessary for you
to know how many gallons of wine there are in the tavern? One glass is
enough for you. What need is there of your knowing the infinite
qualities of God? You may discriminate for millions of years about
God\'s attributes and still you will not know them.\"

The Master remained silent a few minutes. A brahmin pundit came into the
room.

**Sufferings in the worldly life**

MASTER (to M.): \"There is no substance whatsoever in the worldly life.
The members of Ishan\'s family are good; so he has some peace here.
Suppose his sons had been lewd, disobedient, and addicted to drink and
other vices. Then there would have been no end to his troubles. One very
seldom comes across such a religious family, in which all the members
are devoted to God. I have seen only two or three such families.
Generally one finds quarrels, misunderstanding, jealousy, and friction.
Besides, there are disease, grief, and poverty in the world. Seeing this
condition, I prayed to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother, turn my mind at
once from the world to God.\'

\"Look at Narendra\'s troubles. His father is dead and the members of
his family are starving. He has been trying his utmost to secure a
position, but he has not yet found one. Just see how unsettled his mind
is!

(To M.) \"You used to come to Dakshineswar very frequently. But why have
you become such a rare visitor? Perhaps you have become particularly
friendly with your wife. Is it true? Why should I blame you? The
influence of \'woman and gold\' is everywhere. Therefore I pray, \'O
Divine Mother, please don\'t make me a worldly man if I am to be born
again in a human body.\' \"

BRĀHMIN SCHOLAR: \"Why should you say that, sir? The scriptures extol
the life of a householder.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, that is true. But it is very difficult to lead the true
life of a householder. (To M.) How wrong of us! They are singing,
especially Narendra, and we have left the room.\"

About four o\'clock in the afternoon the Master left in a carriage for
the house where Pundit Shashadhar was staying. As soon as Sri
Ramakrishna got into the carriage he went into samādhi. His physical
frame was very tender as a result of the austerities he had undergone
during the long years of his spiritual discipline and his constant
absorption in God-Consciousness.

The Master would suffer from the slightest physical discomfort and even
from the vibration of worldly thoughts around him. Once Keshab Chandra
Sen had said that Sri Ramakrishna, Christ, and Sri Chaitanya belonged to
a delicate species of humanity that should be kept in a glass case and
protected from the vulgar contact of the world.

It was the rainy season, and a fine drizzle of rain had made the road
muddy. The sky was overcast. The devotees followed the carriage on foot.
As the carriage stopped in front of the house, the host and his
relatives welcomed the Master and took him upstairs to the drawing-room.
There the Master met the pundit.

**Pundit Shashadhar**

Pundit Shashadhar, a man of fair complexion and no longer young, had a
string of rudraksha beads around his neck. He was one of the renowned
Sanskrit scholars of his time-a pillar of orthodox Hinduism, which had
reasserted itself after the first wave of Christianity and Western
culture had passed over Hindu society. His clear exposition of the Hindu
scriptures, his ringing sincerity, and, his stirring eloquence had
brought back a large number of the educated young Hindus of Bengal to
the religion of their forefathers.

The pundit saluted the Master with reverence. Narendra, Rākhāl , Ram,
Hazra, and M., who had come with the Master, seated themselves in the
room as near the Master as they could, anxious not to miss one of his
words.

At the sight of the pundit the Master again went into samādhi. After a
while, still remaining in that state, he looked at the pundit and said
with a smile, \"Very well, very well.\" Then, addressing the pundit, the
Master said, \"Tell me how you give lectures.\"

PUNDIT: \"Sir, I try to explain the teachings of the Hindu scriptures.\"

> **Efficacy of bhakti for modern times**

MASTER: \"For the Kaliyuga the path of devotion described by Nārada is
best. Where can people find time now

to perform their duties according to the scriptural injunctions?
Nowadays the decoctions of roots and herbs of the orthodox Hindu
physicians cannot be given to a fever patient. By the time that kind of
medicine begins its slow process of curing, the patient is done for.
Therefore only a drastic medicine like the allopathic \'fever mixture\'
is effective now. You may ask people to practise scriptural rites and
rituals; but, when prescribing the rituals, remove the \'head and
tail\'. I tell people not to bother about the elaborate rituals of the
sandhya as enjoined in the scriptures. I say that it will be enough for
them to repeat the Gayatri alone. If you must give instruction about
scriptural ceremonies, do so only to a very few, like Ishan.

**Futility of lecturing**

\"You may deliver thousands of lectures, but they won\'t make the
slightest impression on worldly people. Can one drive a nail into a
stone wall? The point of the nail will sooner break than make a dent in
the stone. What will you gain by striking the tough skin of the
crocodile with a sword? The sādhu\'s water-bowl, made from the shell of
a bitter gourd, may visit the four principal holy places of India with
its owner, but it will still remain as bitter as ever. Your lectures are
not helping worldly people very much; and you will realize this by and
by. The calf cannot stand on its legs all at once. Now it drops to the
ground and now it stands up. So it learns to stand finally on its legs
and walk.

\"You cannot distinguish a lover of God from a worldly person. It isn\'t
your fault, of course. When the first onrush of the gale shakes the
trees, it is impossible to distinguish one tree from another-the mango
from the tamarind, for instance.

**Rituals prepare the way for divine love**

\"Without having realized God one cannot give up rituals altogether. How
long should one practise the sandhya and other forms of ritualistic
worship? As long as one does not shed tears of joy at the name of God
and feel a thrill in one\'s body. You will know that your ritualistic
worship has come to an end when your eyes become filled with tears as
you repeat \'Om Rāma\'. Then you do not have to continue your sandhya or
other rituals.

\"When the fruit appears the blossom drops off. Love of God is the
fruit, and rituals are the blossom. When the daughter-in-law of the
house becomes pregnant, she cannot do much work. Her mother-in-law
gradually lessens her duties in the house. When her time arrives she
does practically nothing. And after the child is born her only work is
to play with it. She doesn\'t do any household duties at all. The
sandhya merges in the Gayatri, the Gayatri in Om, and, Om in samādhi. It
is like the sound of a bell: t-a-m. The yogi, by following in the trail
of the sound Om, gradually merges himself in the Supreme Brahman. His
sandhya and other ritualistic duties disappear in samādhi. Thus the
duties of the Jnāni come to an end.\"

As the Master talked of samādhi, he himself went into that state. His
face radiated a heavenly light. Bereft of outer consciousness, he could
not utter another word. His gaze was indrawn and transfixed in communion
with the Self. After a long time the Master began to recognize the world
around him and said, like a child, \"I shall have a drink of water.\"
Whenever after samādhi the Master asked for a drink of water, his
devotees knew that he was gradually becoming conscious of the outer
world.

Still lingering in the state of ecstasy, he said to the Divine Mother:
\"O Mother, the other day You showed me Pundit Iswar Chandra Vidyasagar.
Then I told You that I should like to see another pundit, and so You
have brought me here.\"

Looking at the pundit, he said: \"My child, add a little more to your
strength. Practise spiritual discipline a few days more. You have hardly
set your foot on the tree, yet you expect to lay hold of a big cluster
of fruit. But, of course, you are doing all this for the welfare of
others.\" With these words he bowed his head before the pundit.

The Master continued: \"When I first heard about you, I inquired whether
you were merely erudite or whether you had discrimination and
renunciation. A pundit who doesn\'t know how to discriminate between the
Real and the unreal is no pundit at all.

**Preacher with God\'s commission**

\"There is no harm in teaching others if the preacher has a commission
from the Lord. Nobody can confound a preacher who teaches people after
having received the command of God. Getting a ray of light from the
goddess of learning, a man becomes so powerful that before him big
scholars seem mere earthworms.

\"When the lamp is lighted the moths come in swarms. They don\'t have to
be invited. In the same way, the preacher who has a commission from God
need not invite people to hear him. He doesn\'t have to announce the
time of his lectures. He possesses such irresistible attraction that
people come to him of their own accord. People of all classes, even
kings and aristocrats, gather around him. They say to him: \'Revered
sir, what can we offer you? Here are mangoes, sweets, money, shawls, and
other things. What will you be pleased to accept?\' In that case I say
to them: \'Go away. I don\'t care, for these. I don\'t want anything.\'

\"Does the magnet say to the iron, \'Come near me?\' That is not
necessary. Because of the attraction of the magnet, the iron rushes to
it.

**Divine wisdom is inexhaustible**

\"Such a preacher may not be a scholarly person, but don\'t conclude
from that that he has any lack of wisdom. Does book-learning make one
wise? He who has a commission from God never runs short of wisdom. That
wisdom comes from God; it is inexhaustible. At Kamarpukur I have seen
people measuring grain. It lies in a heap. One man keeps pushing grain
from the heap toward another man, who weighs it on a scales. So the man
who weighs doesn\'t run short of grain. It is the same with the preacher
who has received a commission from God. As he teaches people, the Divine
Mother Herself supplies him with fresh knowledge from behind. That
knowledge never comes to an end.

\"Can a preacher ever lack knowledge if but once he is favoured with a
benign glance from the Divine Mother? Therefore I ask you whether you
have received any commission from God.\"

HAZRA: \"Oh yes, he must have it. (To the pundit) Isn\'t it true, sir?\"

PUNDIT: \"Commission? No, sir, I am afraid I haven\'t received any such
thing.\"

HOST: \"He may not have received the commission, but he preaches from a
sense of duty.\"

MASTER: \"What will a man accomplish by mere lectures without the
commission from God? Once a Brahmo preacher said in the course of his
sermon, \'Friends, how much I used to drink!\' and so on. Hearing this
the people began to whisper among themselves: \'What is this fool
saying? He used to drink!\' Now these words produced a very unfavourable
effect. This shows that preaching cannot bring a good result unless it
comes from a good man.

\"A high government official from Barisal once said to me, \'Sir, if you
begin the work of preaching, I too shall gird my loins.\' I told him the
story of people\'s dirtying the bank of the Haldārpukur and of its being
stopped only when a constable, armed with authority from the government,
put up a notice prohibiting it.

\"So I say, a worthless man may talk his head off preaching, and yet he
will produce no effect. But people will listen to him if he is armed
with a badge of authority from God. One cannot teach others without the
commission from God. A teacher of men must have great power. There\'s
many a Hanumanpuri in Calcutta. It is with them that you will have to
wrestle. (Pointing to the people assembled there) These are mere sheep!

\"Chaitanyadeva was an Incarnation of God. How little is left of what he
accomplished-not to speak of a lecturer who preaches without authority
from God! What good will a lecturer do?

**Master exhorts the pundit to cultivate divine love** \"Therefore I say
to you, dive deep in God-Consciousness.\"

Saying this, the Master began to sing in an ecstasy of love for God:

> *Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God\'s Beauty; If you
> descend to the uttermost depths, There you will find the gem of Love.
> . . .*

The Master continued: \"One does not die if one sinks in this Ocean.
This is the Ocean of Immortality. Once I said to Narendra: \'God is the
Ocean of Bliss. Tell me if you want to plunge into It. Just imagine
there is some syrup in a cup and that you have become a fly. Now tell me
where you will sit to sip the syrup.\' Narendra answered: \'I will, sit
on the edge of the cup and stretch out my neck to drink, because I am
sure to die if I go far into the cup.\' Then I said to him: \'But my
child, this is the Ocean of Satchidananda. There is no fear of death in
it. This is the Ocean of Immortality. Only ignorant people say that one
should not have an excess of devotion and divine love. How foolish! Can
there be any excess of divine love?\'

(To the pundit) \"Therefore I say to you, dive into the Ocean of
Satchidananda. Nothing will ever worry you if you but realize God. Then
you will get His commission to teach people.

**Many paths to realize God**

\"There are innumerable pathways leading to the Ocean of Immortality.
The essential thing is to reach the Ocean. It doesn\'t matter which path
you follow. Imagine that there is a reservoir containing the Elixir of
Immortality. You will be immortal if a few drops of the Elixir somehow
get into your mouth. You may get into the reservoir either by jumping
into it, or by being pushed into it from behind, or by slowly walking
down the steps. The effect is one and the same. You will become immortal
by tasting a drop of that Elixir.

**Three yogas explained by Master**

\"Innumerable are the ways that lead to God. There are the paths of
jnāna, of karma, and of bhakti. If you are sincere, you will attain God
in the end, whichever path you follow. Roughly speaking, there are three
kinds of yoga: jnanayoga, karma yoga, and bhaktiyoga.

\"What is jnanayoga? The Jnāni seeks to realize Brahman. He
discriminates, saying, \'Not this, not this\'. He discriminates, saying,
\'Brahman is real and the universe illusory.\' He discriminates between
the Real and the unreal. As he comes to the end of discrimination, he
goes into samādhi and attains the Knowledge of Brahman.

\"What is karmayoga? Its aim is to fix one\'s mind on God by means of
work. That is what you are teaching. It consists of breath-control,
concentration, meditation, and so on, done in a spirit of detachment. If
a householder performs his duties in the world in a spirit of
detachment, surrendering the results to God and with devotion to God in
his heart, he too may be said to practise karmayoga. Further, if a
person performs worship, japa, and other forms of devotion, surrendering
the results to God, he may be said to practise karmayoga. Attainment of
God alone is the aim of karmayoga.

\"What is bhaktiyoga? It is to keep the mind on God by chanting His name
and glories. For the Kaliyuga the path of devotion is easiest. This is
indeed the path for this age.

**Difficulties of the paths of jnāna and karma**

\"The path of karma is very difficult. First of all, as I have just
said, where will one find the time for it nowadays? Where is the time
for a man to perform his duties as enjoined in the scriptures? Man\'s
life is short in this age. Further, it is extremely difficult to perform
one\'s duties in a spirit of detachment, without craving the result. One
cannot work in such a spirit without first having realized God.
Attachment to the result somehow enters the mind, though you may not be
aware of it.

\"To follow jnanayoga in this age is also very difficult. First, a
man\'s life depends entirely on food. Second, he has a short span of
life. Third, he can by no means get rid of body-consciousness; and the
Knowledge of Brahman is impossible without the destruction of
body-consciousness. The Jnāni says: \'I am Brahman; I am not the body. I
am beyond hunger and thirst, disease and grief, birth and death,
pleasure and pain.\' How can

you be a Jnāni if you are conscious of disease, grief, pain, pleasure,
and the like? A thorn enters your flesh, blood flow from the wound, and
you suffer very badly from the pain; but nevertheless, if you are a
Jnāni you must be able to say: \'Why, there is no thorn in my flesh at
all. Nothing is the matter with me\'

\"Therefore bhaktiyoga is prescribed for this age. By following this
path one comes to God more easily than by following the others. One can
undoubtedly, reach God by following the paths of jnāna and karma, but
they are very difficult paths.

**God fulfils all desires of His devotees**

\"Bhaktiyoga is the religion for this age. But that does not mean that
the lover of God will reach one goal and the philosopher and worker
another. It means that if a person seeks the Knowledge of Brahman he can
attain It by following the path of bhakti, too. God, who loves His
devotee, can give him the Knowledge of Brahman if He so desires.

\"But the bhakta wants to realize the Personal God endowed with form and
talk to Him. He seldom seeks the Knowledge of Brahman. But God, who does
everything at His pleasure, can make His devotee the heir to His
infinite glories if it pleases Him. He gives His devotee both the Love
of God and the Knowledge of Brahman. If one is able somehow to reach
Calcutta, one can see the Maidan and the museum and other places too.
The thing is how to reach Calcutta.

\"By realizing the Divine Mother of the Universe, you will get Knowledge
as well as Devotion. You will get both. In bhava samādhi you will see
the form of God, and in nirvikalpa samādhi you will realize Brahman, the
Absolute Existence-Knowledge-Bliss. In nirvikalpa samādhi ego, name, and
form do not exist.

**Devotee\'s prayer to God**

\"A lover of God prays to the Divine Mother: \'O Mother, I am very much
afraid of selfish actions. Such actions have desires behind them, and if
I perform them I shall have to reap their fruit. But it is very
difficult to work in a detached spirit. I shall certainly forget Thee, O
Mother, if I involve myself in selfish actions. Therefore I have no use
for them. May my actions, O Divine Mother, be fewer every day till I
attain Thee. May I perform, without attachment to the results, only what
action is absolutely necessary for me. May I have great love for Thee as
I go on with my few duties. May I not entangle myself in new work so
long as I do not realize Thee. But I shall perform it if I receive Thy
command. Otherwise not.\' \"

**About pilgrimage**

PUNDIT: \"How far did you go in visiting the sacred places?\"

MASTER: \"Oh, I visited a few places. (With a smile) But Hazra went
farther and also climbed higher. He visited Hrishikesh, but I didn\'t go
so far or so high.

\"You must pave noticed kites and vultures soaring very high in the sky;
but their eyes are always fixed on the charnel-pits. Do you know the
meaning of \'charnel-pits\'? It is \'woman and gold\'.

\"What is the use of making pilgrimages if you can attain love of God
remaining where you are? I have been to Benares and noticed the same
trees there as here. The same green tamarind-leaves!

\"Pilgrimage becomes futile if it does not enable you to attain love of
God. Love of God is the one essential and necessary thing. Do you know
the meaning of \'kites and vultures\'? There are many people who talk
big and who say that they have performed most of the duties enjoined in
the scriptures. But with all that their minds are engrossed in
worldliness and deeply preoccupied with money, riches, name, fame,
creature comforts, and such things.\"

PUNDIT: \"It is true, sir. Going on a pilgrimage is like seeking
diamonds and gems, while discarding the precious stone that is worn by
Narayana Himself on His breast.\"

MASTER: \"I want you to remember this. You may impart thousands of
instructions to people, but they will not bear fruit except in proper
time. On going to bed, a child said to his mother, \'Mother, please wake
me up when I feel the call of nature.\' The mother said: \'Don\'t worry
about it, my child. That call will wake you up itself.\' (All laugh.)
One feels yearning for God at the proper time.

**Three kinds of teachers**

\"There are three classes of physicians. The physicians of one class
feel the patient\'s pulse and go away, merely prescribing medicine. As
they leave the room they simply ask the patient to take the medicine.
They are the poorest class of physicians. Likewise, there are teachers
who only give instruction, but do not stop to see whether their
teachings have produced a good or bad effect. They do not think at all
about the disciple.

\"There are physicians of another class, who prescribe medicine and ask
the patient to take it. If the patient is unwilling to follow their
directions, they reason with him. They are the mediocre physicians.
Likewise, there are mediocre teachers. They give instruction to the
student and, further, try to persuade him in various ways to follow the
instruction.

\"Lastly, there are the physicians of the highest class. If the patient
does

not respond to their gentle persuasion, they even exert force upon him.
If necessary, they press their knees on the patient\'s chest and force
the medicine down his throat. Likewise, there are teachers of the
highest class, who even exert force to direct the mind of the pupil
toward God.\"

PUNDIT: Sir, if there are such superior teachers as you have described,
then why should you say that one does not get the Knowledge of God until
the right time comes?\"

MASTER: \"You are right. But what will the physician do if the medicine
runs out of the patient\'s mouth and doesn\'t reach his stomach? In such
a case even the best physician can\'t do anything.

\"The teacher should judge the fitness of the student before giving him
instruction. But you don\'t discriminate in your instruction. When a
young man comes to me for instruction, first of all I ask him about his
relatives at home. Suppose he has lost his father; suppose his father
has left some debts for him. How can such a person direct his mind to
God? Are you listening to me?\"

PUNDIT: \"Yes, sir. I am paying attention to every word.\"

MASTER: \"One day some Sikh soldiers came to the temple garden at
Dakshineswar. I met them in front of the Kāli temple. One of them
referred to God as very compassionate. \'Indeed!\' I said. \'Is that
true? But how do you know?\' He answered, \'Because, sir, God gives us
food and takes every care of us.\' I said: \'Why should that surprise
you? God is the Father of us all. Who will look after the child if the
father doesn\'t? Do you mean to say that the people of the neighbouring
village should look after the child?\"

NARENDRA: \"Then shouldn\'t we call God kind?\"

MASTER: \"Have I forbidden you to? What I mean is that God is our very
own. He is not a stranger to us.\"

PUNDIT: \"Priceless words!\"

MASTER (to Narendra): \"I listened to your singing, but I didn\'t enjoy
it. So I left the room. Your mind is now set on seeking a job, and
therefore your song sounded dull.\"

Narendra flushed. He felt ashamed of himself and remained silent.

The Master asked for a drink of water. A glass of water had been placed
near him, but he could not take it. He asked for some fresh water. Later
it was found that a man of immoral character had touched the first
glass.

PUNDIT (to Hazra): \"You live in his company day and night. You must be
very happy.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"This is indeed a great occasion for me. Today I
have seen the crescent moon of the second day of the bright fortnight.
(All laugh.) Do you know why I referred to the moon of the second day?
Sita once said to Ravana, \'You are the full moon and Rāma is the
crescent moon of the second day of the bright fortnight.\' Ravana did
not understand the meaning of these words. He thought Sita was
flattering him and became exceedingly happy. But Sita meant that Ravana
had reached the fullest limit of his power and prosperity, and that
thenceforth he would wane like the full moon. Rāma, on the other hand,
was like the moon of the second day. He would wax day by day.\"

The Master was about to take his leave. The pundit and his friends bowed
low before him.

It was not yet dusk, and Sri Ramakrishna returned to Ishan\'s house with
the devotees. The Master took his seat in the drawing-room with Ishan
and his sons, a pundit, and a few devotees.

MASTER (smiling to Ishan): \"I said to Pundit Shashadhar: \'You have
hardly set your foot on the tree, and yet you aspire to lay hold of a
big bunch of fruit. First of all practise some spiritual discipline.
Then you may teach others.\' \"

ISHAN: \"Every preacher thinks that he enlightens others. The glowworm
also may think that it illumines the world. Imagining this to be the
glow--worm\'s feeling, someone said to it: \'O glow--worm, how can you
bring light to the world? You only reveal the intensity of the
darkness.\' \"

MASTER (with a smile): \"But Shashadhar is not just a scholar. He also
has a little discrimination and dispassion.\"

A pundit who was present said to Sri Ramakrishna, \"You are indeed a
great soul.\"

MASTER: \"You may say that about sages like Nārada, Prahlada, or
Sukadeva. I am like your son.

\"Of course, in one sense your words are true. It is said that in one
respect the devotee of God is greater than God Himself, because he
carries God in his heart. (All rejoice.) It is said in the Vaishnava
books: \'A devotee regards himself as a higher, and God as a lower,
being.\' Yaśoda, the mother of Krishna, was about to fetter Krishna, who
was God Incarnate, with chains. She believed that no one but herself
could take care of Krishna.

\"Sometimes God acts as the magnet and the devotee as the needle. God
attracts the devotee to Himself. Again, sometimes the devotee acts as
the magnet and God as the needle. Such is the attraction of the devotee
that God comes to him, unable to resist his love.\"

The Master was about to leave for Dakshineswar. Ishan and the other
devotees stood around him while he gave Ishan various words of advice.

**Advice to householders**

MASTER: \"A devotee who can call on God while living a householder\'s
life is a hero indeed. God thinks: \'He who has renounced the world for
My sake will surely pray to Me. He must serve Me. Is there anything very
remarkable about it? People will cry shame on him if he fails to do so.
But he is blessed indeed who prays to Me in the midst of his worldly
duties. He is trying to find Me, overcoming a great obstacle-pushing
away, as it were, a huge block of stone weighing a ton. Such a man is a
real hero.\' \"

PUNDIT: \"You are right, sir. The scripture says the same thing. There
is in the Mahabharata the story of the \'pious hunter\' and the \'chaste
woman\'. Once a hermit was disturbed in his meditation by a crow. When
he cast an angry glance at the bird, it was reduced to ashes. The hermit
said to himself: \'I have destroyed the crow by a mere glance. I must
have made great progress in spiritual life.\' One day he went to a
woman\'s house to beg his food. She was devoted to her husband and
served him day and night; she provided him with water to wash

his feet and even dried them with her hair. When the hermit knocked at
her door for alms, she was serving her husband and could not open the
door at once. The hermit, in a fit of anger, began to curse her. The
chaste woman answered from the inner apartments: \'I am not your crow.
Wait a few minutes, sir. After finishing my service to my husband I
shall give you my attention.\' The hermit was very much surprised to
find that this simple woman was aware of his having burnt the crow to
ashes. He wanted her to give him spiritual instruction. At her bidding
he went to the \'pious hunter\' at Benares. This hunter sold meat, but
he also served his parents day and night as embodiments of God. The
hermit said to himself in utter amazement: \'Why, he is a butcher and a
worldly man! How can he give me the Knowledge of Brahman?\' But the
hunter was a knower of Brahman and had acquired divine knowledge through
the performance of his worldly duties. The hermit was illumined by the
instruction of the \'pious hunter\'.\"

The Master was about to take his leave. He was standing at the door of
the next house, where Ishan\'s father-in-law lived. Ishan and the other
devotees stood by the Master. They were waiting to bid him good-bye. Sri
Ramakrishna said to Ishan: \"Live in the world like an ant. The world
contains a mixture of truth and untruth, sugar and sand. Be an ant and
take the sugar.

\"Again, the world is a mixture of milk and water, the bliss of
God-Consciousness and the pleasure of sense-enjoyment. Be a swan and
drink the milk, leaving the water aside.

\"Live in the world like a waterfowl. The water clings to the bird, but
the bird shakes it off. Live in the world like a mudfish. The fish lives
in the mud, but its skin is always bright and shiny.

\"The world is indeed a mixture of truth and make-believe. Discard the
make-believe and take the truth.\"

Sri Ramakrishna got into the carriage and left for Dakshineswar.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 25**

ADVICE TO PUNDIT SHASHADHAR

> Monday, June 30, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was in his room, sitting on a mat spread on the floor.
Pundit Shashadhar and a few

devotees were with him on the mat, and the rest sat on the bare floor.
Surendra, Baburam, M., Harish, Lātu,

Hazra, and others were present. It was about four o\'clock in the
afternoon.

Sri Ramakrishna had met Pundit Shashadhar six days before in Calcutta,
and now the pundit had come to Dakshineswar to visit the Master. Bhudar
Chattopadhyaya and his elder brother, the pundit\'s hosts, were with
him.

**Nature of Brahman**

The pundit was a follower of the path of jnāna. The Master was
explaining this path to him. He said: \"Nityā and Lila are the two
aspects of one and the same Reality. He who is the Indivisible
Satchidananda has assumed different forms for the sake of His Lila.\" As
he described the nature of the Ultimate Reality the Master every now and
then became unconscious in samādhi. While he talked he was intoxicated
with spiritual fervour. He said to the pundit: \"My dear sir, Brahman is
immutalble and immovable, like Mount Sumeru. But He who is \'immovable\'
can also \'move\'.\"

**Glories of Kāli**

The Master was in ecstasy. He began to sing in his melodious voice:

> *Who is there that can understand what Mother Kāli is?*
>
> *Even the six darsanas are powerless to reveal Her. . . .*

He went on:

> *Is Mother merely a simple woman, born as others are born?*
>
> *Only by chanting Her holy name*
>
> *Does Śiva survive the deadly poison.*
>
> *She it is who creates the worlds, She who preserves and destroys,*
>
> *With a mere wink of Her wondrous eyes;*
>
> *She holds the universe in Her womb.*
>
> *Seeking a shelter at Her feet, the gods themselves feel safe; And
> Mahadeva, God of Gods, Lies prostrate underneath Her feet.*

Again he sang:

> *Is Mother only Śiva\'s wife? To Her must needs bow down*
>
> *The all-destroying King of Death!*
>
> *Naked She roams about the world, slaying Her demon foes,*
>
> *Or stands erect on Śiva\'s breast.*
>
> *Her feet upon Her Husband\'s form! What a strange wife She makes!*
>
> *My Mother\'s play, declares Prasad, shatters all rules and laws:*
>
> *Strive hard for purity, O mind,*
>
> *And understand my Mother\'s ways.*

And again:

> *I drink no ordinary wine, but Wine of Everlasting Bliss,*
>
> *As I repeat my Mother Kāli\'s name;*
>
> *It so intoxicates my mind that people take me to be drunk! . . .*

And again:

> *Can everyone have the vision of Syama? Is Kāli\'s treasure for
> everyone?*
>
> *Oh, what a pity my foolish mind will not see what is true!*
>
> *Even with all His penances, rarely does Śiva Himself behold*
>
> *The mind-bewitching sight of Mother Syama\'s crimson feet.*
>
> *To him who meditates on Her the riches of heaven are poor indeed;*
>
> *If Syama casts Her glance on him, he swims in Eternal Bliss.*
>
> *The prince of yogis, the king of the gods, meditate on Her feet in
> vain*
>
> *Yet worthless kamalakanta yearns for the Mother\'s blessed feet!*

The Master\'s ecstatic mood gradually relaxed. He stopped singing and
sat in silence. After a while he got up and sat on the small couch.

Pundit Shashadhar was charmed with his singing. Very humbly he said to
Sri Ramakrishna, \"Are you going to sing anymore?\"

A little later the Master sang again:

> *High in the heaven of the Mother\'s feet, my mind was soaring like a
> kite,*
>
> *When came a blast of sin\'s rough wind that drove it swiftly toward
> the earth. . . .*

Then he sang:

> *Once for all, this time, I have thoroughly understood;*
>
> *From One who knows it well, I have learnt the secret of bhava.*
>
> *A man has come to me from a country where there is no night,*
>
> *And now I cannot distinguish day from night any longer;*
>
> *Rituals and devotions have all grown profitless for me.*
>
> *My sleep is broken; how can I slumber any more?*
>
> *For now I am wide awake in the sleeplessness of yoga.*
>
> *O Divine Mother, made one with Thee in yoga-sleep at last, My slumber
> I have lulled asleep for evermore.*
>
> *I bow my head, says Prasad, before desire and liberation; Knowing the
> secret that Kāli is one with the highest Brahman, I have discarded,
> once for all, both righteousness and sin.*

Sri Ramakrishna continued:

> *I have surrendered my soul at the fearless feet of the Mother;*
>
> *Am I afraid of Death any more?*
>
> *Unto the tuft of hair on my head.*
>
> *Is tied the almighty mantra, Mother Kāli\'s name.*
>
> *My body I have sold in the market-place of the world*
>
> *And with it have bought Sri Durga\'s name.*

As Sri Ramakrishna sang the line, \"And with it have bought Sri Durga\'s
name\", the tears flowed from Pundit Shashadhar\'s eyes. The Master went
on with the song:

> *Deep within my heart I have planted the name of Kāli,*
>
> *The Wish-fulfilling Tree of heaven;*
>
> *When Yama, King of Death, appears,*
>
> *To him I shall open my heart and show it growing there.*
>
> *I have cast out from me my six unflagging foes;4*
>
> *Ready am I to sail life\'s sea,*
>
> *Crying, \"To Durga, victory!\"*

Again he sang:

> *Dwell, O mind, within yourself;*
>
> *Enter no other\'s home.*
>
> *If you but seek there, you will find*
>
> *All you are searching for. . . .*

And again:

> *Though I am never loath to grant salvation,*
>
> *I hesitate indeed to grant pure love.*
>
> *Whoever wins pure love surpasses all;*
>
> *He is adored by men;*
>
> *He triumphs over the three worlds. . . .*

**Mere study of scriptures is futile**

The pundit had studied the Vedas and the other scriptures. He loved to
discuss philosophy. The Master, seated on the couch, cast his benign
look on the pundit and gave him counsel through parables.

MASTER (to the pundit): \"There are many scriptures like the Vedas. But
one cannot realize God without austerity and spiritual discipline. \'God
cannot be found in the six systems, the Vedas, or the Tantra.\'

\"But one should learn the contents of the scriptures and then act
according to their injunctions. A man lost a letter. He couldn\'t
remember where he had left it. He began to search for it with a lamp.
After two or three people had searched, the letter was at last found.
The message in the letter was: \'Please send us five seers of sandesh
and a piece of wearing-cloth.\' The man read it and then threw the
letter away. There was no further need of it; now all he had to do was
to buy the five seers of sandesh and the piece of cloth.

**Reading, hearing, and seeing**

\"Better than reading is hearing, and better than hearing is seeing. One
understands the scriptures better by hearing them from the lips of the
guru or of a holy man. Then one doesn\'t have to think about their
non-essential part.

Hanuman said: \'Brother, I don\'t know much about the phase of the moon
or the position of the stars. I just contemplate Rāma.\'

\"But seeing is far better than hearing. Then all doubts disappear. It
is true that many things are recorded in the scriptures; but all these
are useless without the direct realization of God, without devotion to
His Lotus Feet, without purity of heart. The almanac forecasts the
rainfall of the year. But not a drop of water will you get by squeezing
the almanac. No, not even one drop.

\"How long should one reason about the texts of the scriptures? So long
as one does not have direct realization of God. How long does the bee
buzz about? As long as it is not sitting on a flower. No sooner does it
light on a flower and begin to sip honey than it keeps quiet.

\"But you must remember another thing. One may talk even after the
realization of God. But then one talks only of God and of Divine Bliss.
It is like a drunkard\'s crying, \'Victory to the Divine Mother!\' He
can hardly say anything else on account of his drunkenness. You can
notice, too, that a bee makes an indistinct humming sound after having
sipped the honey from a flower.

**The nature of jnanis and vijnanis**

\"The Jnāni reasons about the world through the process of \'Neti,
neti\', \'Not this, not this\'. Reasoning in this way, he at last comes
to a state of Bliss, and that is Brahman. What is the nature of a Jnāni?
He behaves according to scriptural injunctions.

\"Once I was taken to Chanak and saw some sādhus there. Several of them
were sewing. (All laugh.) At the sight of us they threw aside their
sewing. They sat straight, crossing their legs, and conversed with us.
(All laugh.)

\"But jnanis will not talk about spiritual things without being asked.
They will inquire, at first, about such things as your health and your
family.

\"But the nature of the vijnāni is different. He is unconcerned about
anything. Perhaps he carries his wearing-cloth loose under his arm, like
a child; or perhaps the cloth has dropped from his body altogether.

\"The man who knows that God exists is called a Jnāni. A Jnāni is like
one who knows beyond a doubt that a log of wood contains fire. But a
vijnāni is he who lights the log, cooks over the fire, and is nourished
by the food. The eight fetters have fallen from the vijnāni. He may keep
merely the appearance of lust, anger, and the rest.\"

PUNDIT: \"The knots of his heart are cut asunder; all his doubts are
destroyed.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. Once a ship sailed into the ocean. Suddenly its iron
joints, nails, and screws fell out. The ship was passing a magnetic
hill, and so all its iron was loosened.

\"I used to go to Krishnakishore\'s house. Once, when I was there, he
said to me, \'Why do you chew betel-leaf?\'

1.  said: \'It is my sweet pleasure. I shall chew betel-leaf, look at my
    face in the mirror, and dance naked among a thousand girls.\'6
    Krishnakishore\'s wife scolded him and said: \'What have you said to
    Ramakrishna? You don\'t know how to talk to people.\'

\"In this state, passions like lust and anger are burnt up, though
nothing happens to the physical body. It looks just like any other body;
but the inside is all hollow and pure.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Does the body remain even after the realization of God?\"

MASTER: \"The body survives with some so that they may work out their
prarabdha karma or work for the welfare of others. By bathing in the
Ganges a man gets rid of his sin and attains liberation. But if he
happens to be blind, he doesn\'t get rid of his blindness. Of course, he
escapes future births, which would otherwise be necessary for reaping
the results of his past sinful karma. His present body remains alive as
long as its momentum7 is not exhausted; but future births are no longer
possible. The wheel moves as long as the impulse that has set it in
motion lasts. Then it comes to a stop. In the case of such a person,
passions like lust and anger are burnt up. Only the body remains alive
to perform a few actions.\"

PUNDIT: \"That is called samskara.\"

**The nature of jnanis and vijnanis**

MASTER: \"The vijnāni always sees God. That is why he is so indifferent
about the world. He sees God even with his eyes open. Sometimes he comes
down to the Lila from the Nitya, and sometimes he goes up to the Nitya
from the Lila.\"

PUNDIT: \"I don\'t understand that.\"

MASTER: \"The Jnāni reasons about the world through the process of
\'Neti, neti\', and at last reaches the Eternal and Indivisible
Satchidananda. He reasons in this manner: \'Brahman is not the living
beings; It is neither the universe nor the twenty-four cosmic
principles.\' As a result of such reasoning he attains the Absolute.
Then he realizes that it is the Absolute that has become all this-the
universe, its living beings, and the twenty-four cosmic principles.

\"Milk sets into curd, and the curd is churned into butter. After
extracting the butter one realizes that butter is not essentially
different from buttermilk and buttermilk not essentially different from
butter. The bark of a tree goes with the pith and the pith goes with the
bark.\"

PUNDIT (smiling, to Bhudar): \"Did you understand that? It is very
difficult.\"

**All-embracing realization of the vijnāni**

MASTER: \"If there is butter, there must be buttermilk also. If you
think of butter, you must also think of buttermilk along with it; for
there cannot be any butter without buttermilk. Just so, if you accept
the Nitya, you must also accept the Lila. It is the process of negation
and affirmation. You realize the Nitya by negating the Lila. Then you
affirm the Lila, seeing in it the manifestation of the Nitya. One
attains this state after realizing Reality in both aspects: Personal and
Impersonal. The Personal is the embodiment of Chit, Consciousness; and
the Impersonal is the Indivisible Satchidananda.

\"Brahman alone has become everything. Therefore to be vijnāni this
world is a \'mansion of myrth\'. But to the Jnāni it is a \'framework of
illusion\'. Ramprasad described the world as a \'framework of
illusion\'. Another man said to him by way of retort:

> *This very world is a mansion of myrth;*
>
> *Here I can eat, here drink and make merry.*
>
> *O physician, you are a fool!*
>
> *You see only the surface of things.*
>
> *Janaka\'s might was unsurpassed;*
>
> *What did he lack of the world or the Spirit?*
>
> *Holding to one as well as the other,*
>
> *He drank his milk from a brimming cup!*

\"The vijnāni enjoys the bliss of God in a richer way. Some have heard
of milk, some have seen it, and some have drunk it. The vijnāni has
drunk milk, enjoyed it, and been nourished by it.\"

The Master remained silent a few moments and then asked Pundit
Shashadhar to have a smoke. The Pundit went to the south east verandah
to smoke. Soon he came back to the room and sat on the floor with the
devotees. Seated on the small couch, the Master continued the
conversation.

MASTER (to the Pundit): \"Let me tell you something. There are three
kinds of Ānanda, joy: the joy of worldly enjoyment, the joy of worship,
and the Joy of Brahman. The joy of worldly enjoyment is the joy of
\'woman and gold\', which people always enjoy. The joy of worship one
enjoys while chanting the name and glories of God. And the Joy of
Brahman is the joy of God-vision. After experiencing the joy of
God-vision the rishis of olden times went beyond all rules and
conventions.

**Three states of God-Consciousness**

\"Chaitanyadeva used to experience three spiritual states: the inmost,
the semi-conscious, and the conscious. In the inmost state he would see
God and go into samādhi. He would be in the state of jada samādhi. In
the semi-conscious state he would be partially conscious of the outer
world. In the conscious state he could sing the name and glories of
God.\"

HAZRA (to the Pundit): \"So your doubts are now solved.\"

**Samādhi described**

MASTER (to the Pundit): \"What is samādhi? It is the complete merging of
the mind in God-Consciousness. The Jnāni experiences jada samādhi, in
which no trace of \'I\' is left. The samādhi attained through the path
of bhakti is called \'chetana samādhi\'. In this samādhi there remains
the conciousness of \'I\' ― the \'I\' of the servant-and-Master
relationship, of the lover-and-Beloved relationship, of the
enjoyer-and-Food relationship. God is the Master; the devotee is the
servant. God is the beloved; the devotee is the lover. God is the Food,
and the devotee is the enjoyer. \'I don\'t want to be sugar. I want to
eat it.\' \"

PUNDIT : \"What will happen if God dissolves all of the \'I\', if He
changes the enjoyer himself into sugar?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Come, come! Tell me what is in your mind. But don\'t
the scriptures mention Nārada,

Sanaka, Sanatana, Sananda, and Sanatkumara?\"

PUNDIT: \"Yes, sir. They do.\"

MASTER: \"Though they were jnanis, yet they kept the \'I\' of the
bhakta. Haven\'t you read the Bhagavata?\"

PUNDIT: \"I have read only part of it, not the whole.\"

MASTER: \"Pray to God. He is full of compassion. Will He not listen to
the words of His devotee? He is the Kalpataru. You will get whatever you
desire from Him.\"

PUNDIT: \"I haven\'t thought deeply about these things before. But now I
understand.\"

MASTER: \"God keeps a little of \'I\' in His devotee even after giving
him the Knowledge of Brahman. That \'I\' is the \'I of the devotee\',
the \'I of the Jnāni\'. Through that \'I\' the devotee enjoys the
infinite play of God.

\"The pestle was almost worn out with rubbing. Only a little was left.
That fell into the underbrush and brought about the destruction of the
lunar race, the race of the Yadus. The vijnāni retains the \'I of the
devotee\', the \'I of the Jnāni\', in order to taste the Bliss of God
and teach people.

\"The rishis of old had timid natures. They were easily frightened. Do
you know their attitude? It was this: \'Let me somehow get my own
salvation; who cares for others?\' A hollow piece of drift-wood somehow
manages to float; but it sinks if even a bird sits on it. But Nārada and
sages of his kind are like a huge log that not only can float across to
the other shore but can carry many animals and other creatures as well.
A steamship itself crosses the ocean and also carries people across.

**The vijnāni is fearless and joyous**

\"Teachers like Nārada belong to the class of the vijnāni. They were
much more courageous than the other rishis. They are like an expert
satrancha-player. You must have noticed how he shouts, as he throws the
dice: \'What do I want? Six? No, five! Here is five!\' And every time he
throws the dice he gets the number he wants. He is such a clever player!
And while playing he even twirls his moustaches.

\"A mere Jnāni trembles with fear. He is like an amateur
satrancha-player. He is anxious to move his pieces somehow to the safety
zone, where they won\'t be overtaken by his opponent. But a vijnāni
isn\'t afraid of anything. He has realized both aspects of God: Personal
and Impersonal. He has talked with God. He has enjoyed the Bliss of God.

\"It is a joy to merge the mind in the Indivisible Brahman through
contemplation. And it is also a joy to keep the mind on the Lila, the
Relative, without dissolving it in the Absolute.

\"A mere Jnāni is a monotonous person. He always analyses, saying: \'It
is not this, not this. The world is like a dream.\' But I have \'raised
both my hands\'. Therefore I accept everything.

**Parable of the weaver woman**

\"Listen to a story. Once a woman went to see her weaver friend. The
weaver, who had been spinning different kinds of silk thread, was very
happy to see her friend and said to her: \'Friend, I can\'t tell you how
happy I am to see you. Let me get you some refreshments.\' She left the
room. The woman looked at the threads of different colours and was
tempted. She hid a bundle of thread under one arm. The weaver returned
presently with the refreshments and began to feed her guest with great
enthusiasm. But, looking at the thread, she realized that her friend had
taken a bundle. Hitting upon a plan to get it back, she said: \'Friend,
it is so long since I have seen you. This is a day of great joy for me.
I feel very much like asking you to dance with me.\' The friend said,
\'Sister, I am feeling very happy too.\' So the two friends began to
dance together. When the weaver saw that her friend danced without
raising her hands, she said: \'Friend, let us dance with both hands
raised. This is a day of great joy.\' But the guest pressed one arm to
her side and danced raising only the

other. The weaver said: \'How is this, friend? Why should you dance with
only one hand raised? Dance with me raising both hands. Look at me. See
how I dance with both hands raised.\' But the guest still pressed one
arm to her side. She danced with the other hand raised and said with a
smile, \'This is all I know of dancing.\' \"

The Master continued: \"I don\'t press my arm to my side. Both my hands
are free. I am not afraid of anything.

I accept both the Nitya and the Lila, both the Absolute and the
Relative.

**The two kinds of ego**

\"I said to Keshab Sen that he would not be able to realize God without
renouncing the ego. He said, \'Sir, in that case I should not be able to
keep my organization together.\' Thereupon I said to him: \'I am asking
you to give up the \"unripe ego\", the \"wicked ego\". But there is no
harm in the \"ripe ego\", the \"child ego\", the \"servant ego\", the
\"ego of Knowledge\".\'

\"The worldly man\'s ego, the \'ignorant ego\', the \'unripe ego\', is
like a thick stick. It divides, as it were, the water of the Ocean of
Satchidananda. But the \'servant ego\', the \'child ego\', the \'ego of
Knowledge\', is like a line on the water. One clearly sees that there is
only one expanse of water. The dividing line makes it appear that the
water has two parts, but one clearly sees that in reality there is only
one expanse of water.

\"Sankaracharya kept the \'ego of Knowledge\' in order to teach people.
God keeps in many people the \'ego of a Jnāni\' or the \'ego of a
bhakta\' even after they have attained Brahmajnana. Hanuman, after
realizing God in both His Personal and His Impersonal aspect, cherished
toward God the attitude of a servant, a devotee. He said to Rāma: \'O
Rāma, sometimes I think that You are the whole and I am a part of You.
Sometimes I think that You are the Master and I am Your servant. And
sometimes, Rāma, when I contemplate the Absolute, I see that I am You
and You are I.\'

\"Yaśoda became grief-stricken at being separated from Krishna, and
called on Radha. Radha saw Yaśoda\'s suffering and revealed herself to
her as the divine Śakti, which was her real nature. She said to Yaśoda:
\'Krishna is Chidatma, Absolute Consciousness, and I am ChitŚakti, the
Primal Power. Ask a boon of Me: Yaśoda said: \'I don\'t want
Brahmajnana. Please grant me only this: that I may see the form of
Gopala in my meditation; that I may always have the company of
Krishna\'s devotees; that I may always serve the devotees of God; that I
may always chant God\'s name and glories.\'

\"Once the gopis felt a great desire to see the forms of the Lord. So
Krishna asked them to dive into the water of the Jamuna. No sooner did
they dive into the water than they all arrived at Vaikuntha. There they
saw the form of the Lord endowed with His six celestial splendours. But
they did not like it. They said to Krishna: \'We want to see Gopala and
serve Him. Please grant us that boon alone. We don\'t want anything
else.\'

\"Before His departure for Mathura, Krishna wanted to give the Knowledge
of Brahman to the gopis. He said to them: \'I dwell both inside and
outside all beings. Why should you see only one form of Mine?\' The
gopis cried in chorus: \'O Krishna, do You want to go away from us? Is
that why You are instructing us in Brahmajnana?\'

\"Do you know the attitude of the gopis? It is this: \'We are Radha\'s
and Radha is ours.\' \"

A DEVOTEE: \"Does this \'I\' of the devotee never disappear
altogether?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, it disappears at times. Then one attains the Knowledge of
Brahman and goes into samādhi. I too lose it, but not for all the time.
In the musical scale there are seven notes: sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, and
ni. But one cannot keep one\'s voice on \'ni\' a long time. One must
bring it down again to the lower notes. I pray to the Divine Mother,
\'Mother, do not give me Brahmajnana.\' Formerly believers in God with
form used to visit me a great deal. Then the modern Brahmajnanis began
to arrive. During that period I used to remain unconscious in samādhi
most of the time. Whenever I regained consciousness, I would say to the
Divine Mother, \'O Mother, please don\'t give me Brahmajnana.\'\"

**God listens to our prayer**

PUNDIT: \"Does God listen to our prayers?\"

MASTER: \"God is the Kalpataru, the Wish-fulfilling Tree. You will
certainly get whatever you ask of Him. But you must pray standing near
the Kalpataru. Only then will your prayer be fulfilled. But you must
remember another thing. God knows our inner feeling. A man gets the
fulfillment of the desire he cherishes while practising sadhana. As one
thinks, so one receives. A magician was showing his tricks before a
king. Now and then he exclaimed: \'Come confusion! Come delusion! O
King, give me money! Give me clothes!\' Suddenly his tongue turned
upward and clove to the roof of his mouth. He experienced kumbhaka. He
could utter neither word nor sound, and became motionless. People
thought he was dead. They built a vault of bricks and buried him there
in that posture. After a thousand years someone dug into the vault.
Inside it people found a man seated in samādhi. They took him for a holy
man and worshipped him. When they shook him his tongue was loosened and
regained its normal position. The magician became conscious of the outer
world and cried, as he had a thousand years before: \'Come confusion!
Come delusion! O King, give me money! Give me clothes!\'

\"I used to weep, praying to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother, destroy with
Thy thunderbolt my inclination to reason.\' \"

PUNDIT: \"Then you too had an inclination to reason?\"

MASTER :\"Yes, once.\"

PUNDIT: \"Then please assure us that we shall get rid of that
inclination too. How did you get rid of yours?\"

MASTER: \"Oh, somehow or other.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was silent awhile. Then he went on with his
conversation.

MASTER: \"God is the Kalpataru. One should pray standing near It. Then
one will get whatever one desires.

\"How many things God has created! Infinite is His universe. But what
need have I to know about His infinite splendours? If I must know these,
let me first realize Him. Then God Himself will tell me all about them.
What need have I to know how many houses and how many government
securities Jadu Mallick possesses? All that I need is somehow to
converse with Jadu Mallick. I may succeed in seeing him by jumping over
a ditch or through a petition or after being pushed about by his
gate-keeper. Once I get a chance to talk to him, then he himself will
tell me all about his possessions if I ask him. If one becomes
acquainted with the master, then one is respected by his officers too.
(All laugh.)

\"There are some who do not care to know the splendours of God. What do
I care about knowing how many gallons of wine there are in the tavern?
One bottle is enough for me. Why should I desire the knowledge of God\'s
splendours? I am intoxicated with the little wine I have swallowed.

\"Both bhaktiyoga and jnanayoga are paths by which you can realize God.
Whatever path you may follow, you will certainly realize Him. The path
of bhakti is an easy one. The path of knowledge and discrimination is
very difficult. Why should one reason so much to know which path is the
best? I talked about this with Vijay for many days. Once I told him
about a man who used to pray, \'O God, reveal to me who and what You
are.\'

\"The path of knowledge and discrimination is difficult indeed. Parvati,
the Divine Mother, revealed Her various forms to Her father and said,
\'Father, if you want Brahmajnana, then live in the company of holy
men.\'

\"Brahman cannot be described in words. It is said in the Rāma Gitā that
Brahman has only been indirectly hinted at by the scriptures. When one
speaks about the \'cowherd village on the Ganges\', one indirectly
states that the village is situated on the bank of the Ganges.

\"Why shouldn\'t a man be able to realize the formless Brahman? But it
is extremely difficult. He cannot if he

has even the slightest trace of worldliness. He can be directly aware of
Brahman in his inmost consciousness only when he renounces all
sense-objects―form, taste, smell, touch, and sound and only when his
mind completely stops functioning. And then too, he knows only this much
of Brahman―that It exists.\"

Quoting from an Upanishad, the pundit said, \"It is to be experienced
only as Existence.\"

MASTER: \"In order to realize God a devotee should make use of a
particular attitude-the attitude of a \'hero\' or a friend or a handmaid
or a child.\"

MANI MALLICK: \"Only then can one feel attached to God.\"

MASTER: \"For many days I cherished the feeling that I was a companion
of the Divine Mother. I used to say: \'I am the handmaid of Brahmamayi,
the Blissful Mother. O companions of the Divine Mother, make me the
Mother\'s handmaid! I shall go about proudly, saying, \"I am
Brahmamayi\'s handmaid!\" \'

**Different classes of perfect souls**

\"Some souls realize God without practising any spiritual discipline.
They are called nityasiddha, eternally perfect. Those who have realized
God through austerity, japa, and the like, are called sadhanasiddha,
perfect through spiritual discipline. Again, there are those called
kripasiddha, perfect through divine grace. These last may be compared to
a room kept dark a thousand years, which becomes light the moment a lamp
is brought in.

\"There is also a class of devotees, the hathatsiddha, that is to say,
those who have suddenly attained God-vision. Their case is like that of
a poor boy who has suddenly found favour with a rich man. The rich man
marries his daughter to the boy and along with her gives him land,
house, carriage, servants, and so forth.

\"There is still another class of devotees, the svapnasiddha, who have
had the vision of God in a dream.\"

SURENDRA (smiling): \"Let us go to sleep then. We shall wake and find
ourselves babus, aristocrats.\"

MASTER (tenderly): \"You are already a babu. When the letter \'a\' is
joined to the letter \'ka\', \'ka\' becomes \'kaa\'. It is futile to add
another \'a\'. If you add it, you will still have the same \'kaa\'. (All
laugh.)

**Description of the nitya-siddha**

\"The nityasiddha is in a class apart. He is like arani wood. A little
rubbing produces fire. You can get fire from it even without rubbing.
The nityasiddha realizes God by practising slight spiritual discipline
and sometimes without practising any at all. But he does practise
spiritual discipline after realizing God. He is like the gourd or
pumpkin vine―first fruit, then flower.\"

The pundit smiled at this illustration.

MASTER: \"There is the instance of Prahlada. He was a nityasiddha. While
writing the letter \'ka\' he shed a stream of tears.\"

The Master was pleased with the pundit\'s humility. He praised him to
the devotees.

MASTER: \"He has such a nice nature. You find no difficulty in driving a
nail into a mud wall. But its point breaks if you try to drive it
against a stone; and still it will not pierce it. There are people whose
spiritual consciousness is not at all awakened even though they hear
about God a thousand times. They are like a crocodile, on whose hide you
cannot make any impression with a sword \"

PUNDIT: \"But one can hurt a crocodile by throwing a spear into its
belly.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): \"What good is there in reading a whole lot of
scriptures? What good is there in the study of philosophy? What is the
use of talking big? In order to learn archery one should first aim at a
banana tree,

then at a reed, then at a wick, and last at a flying bird. At the
beginning one should concentrate on God with form.

\"Then there are devotees who are beyond the three gunas. They are
eternally devoted to God, like Nārada. These devotees behold Krishna as
Chinmaya, all Spirit, His Abode as Chinmaya, His devotee as Chinmaya. To
them God is eternal, His Abode is eternal, His devotee is eternal.

\"Those who reason and speculate following the process of \'Neti, neti\'
do not accept the Incarnation of God. Hazra says well that Divine
Incarnation is only for the bhakta, and not for the Jnāni, because the
Jnāni is quite contented with his ideal, \'I am He\'.\"

Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees remained silent awhile. The pundit
resumed the conversation.

PUNDIT: \"Sir, how does one get rid of callousness? Laughter makes me
think of muscles and nerves. Grief makes me think of the nervous
system.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"That is why Narayan Shastri used to say, The harmful
effect of the study of the scriptures is that it encourages reasoning
and arguing.\'\"

PUNDIT: \"Is there no way for us then?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, there is the path of discrimination. In a song occurs the
line: \'Ask her son Discrimination about the Truth.\'

\"The way lies through discrimination, renunciation, and passionate
yearning for God. Unless a man practises discrimination, he cannot utter
the right words. One time, after expounding religion at great length,
Pundit Samadhyayi said, \'God is dry.\' He reminded me of the man who
once said, \'My uncle\'s cow-shed is full of horses.\' Now, does anyone
keep horses in a cowshed? (With a smile) You have become like a
chānābarā fried in butter. Now it will be good for you and for others as
well, if you are soaked in syrup a few days. Just a few days.\"

PUNDIT (smiling): \"The sweetmeat is over-fried. It has become
charred.\"

MASTER (with a laugh): \"No! No! It is brown as a cockroach. Just the
right colour.\"

HAZRA: \"The sweetmeat is well cooked. It has become spongy. Now it will
soak up the syrup nicely.\"

MASTER: \"You see, there is no need to read too much of the scriptures.
If you read too much you will be

inclined to reason and argue. Nangta used to teach me thus: What you get
by repeating the word \'Gitā\' tell times is the essence of the book. In
other words, if you repeat \'Gitā\' ten times it is reversed into
\'tagi\', which indicates renunciation.

\"Yes, the way to realize God is through discrimination, renunciation,
and yearning for Him. What kind of yearning? One should yearn for God as
the cow, with yearning heart, runs after its calf.\"

PUNDIT: \"The same thing is said in the Vedas: \'O God, we call on Thee
as the cow lows for the calf.\'\"

MASTER: \"Add your tears to your yearning. And if you can renounce
everything through discrimination and dispassion, then you will be able
to see God. That yearning brings about God-intoxication, whether you
follow the path of knowledge or the path of devotion. The sage Durvasa
was mad with the Knowledge of God.

\"There is a great deal of difference between the knowledge of a
householder and that of an all-renouncing sannyasi. The householder\'s
knowledge is like the light of a lamp, which illumines only the inside
of a room. He cannot see anything, with the help of such knowledge,
except his own body and his immediate family. But the knowledge of the
all-renouncing monk is like the light of the sun. Through that light he
can see both, inside

and outside the room. Chaitanyadeva\'s knowledge had the brilliance of
the sun-the sun of Knowledge. Further, he radiated the soothing light of
the moon of Devotion. He was endowed with both-the Knowledge of Brahman
and ecstatic love of God.

(To the pundit) \"One can attain spiritual consciousness through both
affirmation and negation. There is the positive path of love and
devotion, and there is the negative path of knowledge and
discrimination. You are preaching the path of knowledge. But that
creates a very difficult situation: there the guru and the disciple do
not see each other. Sukadeva went to Janaka for instruction about the
Knowledge of Brahman. Janaka said to him: \'You must pay me the guru\'s
fee beforehand. When you attain the knowledge of Brahman you won\'t pay
me the fee, because the knower of Brahman sees no difference between the
guru and the disciple.\'

**Different stages of divine love**

\"Both negation and affirmation are ways to realize one and the same
goal. Infinite are the opinions and infinite are the ways. But you must
remember one thing. The injunction is that the path of devotion
described by Nārada is best suited to the Kaliyuga. According to this
path, first comes bhakti; then bhava, when bhakti is mature. Higher than
bhava are mahabhava and prema. An ordinary mortal does not attain
mahabhava and prema. He who has achieved these has realized the goal,
that is to say, has attained God.\"

PUNDIT : \"In expounding religion one has to use a great many words.\"

MASTER: \"While preaching, eliminate the \'head and tail\', that is to
say, emphasize only the essentials.\"

The pundit and Mani Mallick became engaged in conversation. Mani was a
member of the Brahmo Samaj. The pundit argued vehemently about the good
and bad sides of the Samaj. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the small
couch and looked on, smiling. Presently he remarked: \"This is the
tamasic aspect of sattva, the attitude of a hero. This is necessary. One
should not hold one\'s tongue at the sight of injustice and untruth.
Suppose a bad woman wants to drag you from the path of righteousness.
You must then assume the heroic attitude and say: \'What? You witch! You
dare injure my spiritual life? I shall cut your body in two right now.\'
\"

With a smile Sri Ramakrishna said to the pundit: \"Mani Mallick has been
following the tenets of the Brahmo Samaj a long time. You can\'t convert
him to your views. Is it an easy thing to destroy old tendencies? Once
there lived a very pious Hindu who always worshipped the Divine Mother
and chanted Her name. When the Mussalmans conquered the country, they
forced him embrace Islam. They said to him: \'You are now a Mussalman.
Say \"Allah\". From now on you must repeat only the name of Allah.\'
With great difficulty he repeated the word \'Allah\', but every now and
then blurted out \'Jagadamba\'. At that the Mussalmans were about to
beat him. Thereupon he said to them: \'I beseech you! Please do not kill
me. I have been trying my utmost to repeat the name of Allah, but our
Jagadamba has filled me up to the throat. She pushes out your Allah.\'
(All laugh.)

**Different paths to suit different tastes**

(To the pundit) \"Please don\'t say anything to Mani Mallick. You must
know that there are different tastes. There are also different powers of
digestion. God has made different religions and creeds to suit different
aspirants. By no means all are fit for the Knowledge of Brahman.
Therefore the worship of God with form has been provided.

\"The mother brings home a fish for her children. She curries part of
the fish, part she fries, and with another part she makes pilau. By no
means all can digest the pilau. So she makes fish soup for those who
have weak stomachs. Further, some want pickled or fried fish. There are
different temperaments. There are differences in the capacity to
comprehend.\"

All sat in silence. Sri Ramakrishna said to the pundit, \"Go and visit
the temples and take a stroll in the garden.\" It was about half past
five in the afternoon. The pundit left the room with his friends and
several of the devotees.

After a while the Master went with M. toward the bathing-ghat on the
Ganges. He said to M., \"Baburam now says, \'What shall I gain by
study?\' \" On the bank of the river he met the pundit and said to him,
\"Aren\'t you going to the Kāli temple?\" The pundit said: \"Yes, sir.
Let us go together.\" With a smiling face Sri Ramakrishna proceeded to
the temple through the courtyard. He said to the pundit, \"Listen to a
song.\"

He sang:

> *Is Kāli, my Mother, really black?*
>
> *The Naked One, of blackest hue,*
>
> *Lights the Lotus of the Heart. . . .*

As he was going through the courtyard, he quoted to the pundit from a
song:

> *Lighting the lamp of Knowledge in the chamber of your heart, Behold
> the face of the Mother, Brahman\'s Embodiment.*

They came to the temple. Sri Ramakrishna saluted the Divine Mother,
touching the ground with his forehead.

Red hibiscus flowers and vilwa-leaves adorned the Mother\'s feet. Her
three eyes radiated love for Her devotees. Two of Her hands were raised
as if to give them boons and reassurance; the other two hands held
symbols of death. She was clothed in a sari of Benares silk and was
decked with ornaments.

**Image of Kāli**

Referring to the image, one of the party remarked, \"I heard it was made
by the sculptor Nabin.\" The Master answered: \"Yes, I know. But to me
She is the Embodiment of Spirit.\"

As Sri Ramakrishna was coming back to his room with the devotees, he
said to Baburam, \"Come with us.\" M.

also joined them.

It was dusk. The Master was sitting on the semicircular porch west of
his room. Baburam and M. sat near him.

He was in a mood of partial ecstasy.

Rākhāl was not then living with Sri Ramakrishna, and therefore the
Master was having difficulties about his personal service. Several
devotees lived with him, but he could not bear the touch of everyone
during his spiritual moods. He hinted to Baburam: \"Do stay with me. It
will be very nice. In this mood I cannot allow others to touch me.\"

The pundit entered the Master\'s room after visiting the temples. The
Master said to him from the porch, \"Take some refreshments.\" The
pundit said that he had not yet performed his evening devotions. At once
Sri Ramakrishna stood up and sang in an exalted mood:

> *Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas,*
>
> *So long as I can breathe my last with Kāli\'s name upon my lips?*
>
> *What need of rituals has a man, what need of devotions any more,*
>
> *If he repeats the Mother\'s name at the three holy hours? . . .*

Intoxicated With ecstatic love, the Master said: \"How long should one
perform devotions? So long as one\'s mind does not merge in God while
repeating Om.\"

PUNDIT: \"Then let me eat the refreshments. I shall perform the
devotions later on.\"

MASTER: \"No, I don\'t want to obstruct the current of your life. It is
not good to renounce anything before the proper time arrives. When the
fruit ripens, the flower drops off of itself. One shouldn\'t forcibly
tear off the green branch of a coconut tree. That injures the tree.\"

Surendra was about to leave. He invited his friends into his carriage.
The Master, still in an ecstatic mood,

said, \"Don\'t take more people than your horse can draw.\" Suredra took
leave of Sri Ramakrishna. The pundit left the room to perform his
worship. M. and Baburam saluted the Master. They were about to leave for
Calcutta. Sri Ramakrishna was still in an ecstatic mood.

MASTER (to M.): \"I cannot utter a word now. Stay a few minutes.\"

M. again took his seat and waited for the Master\'s command. Sri
Ramakrishna motioned to Baburam to take a seat and asked him to fan him
a little. M. also took part in rendering this personal service to the
Master.

MASTER (to M., tenderly): \"Why don\'t you come here so frequently
now?\"

M: \"Not for any special reason. I have been rather busy at home.\"

MASTER: \"Yesterday I came to know Baburam\'s inner nature. That is why
I have been trying so hard to persuade him to live with me. The mother
bird hatches the egg in proper time. Boys like Baburam are pure in
heart. They have not yet fallen into the clutches of \'woman and gold\'.
Isn\'t that so?\"

M: \"It is true, sir. They are still stainless.\"

MASTER: \"They are like a new pot. Milk kept in it will not turn sour.\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"I need Baburam here. I pass through certain spiritual states
when I need someone like him. He says he must not, all at once, live
with me permanently, for it will create difficulties. His relatives will
make trouble. I am asking him to come here Saturdays and Sundays.\"

**Master\'s advice to householders**

The pundit entered the room with his friends. He had finished his
devotions and was ready to eat the refreshments. One of his companions
asked the Master: \"Shall we succeed in spiritual life? Please tell us
what our way is.\"

MASTER: \"You all have the yearning for liberation. If an aspirant has
yearning, that is enough for him to realize God. Don\'t eat any food of
the sraaddha ceremony. Live in the world like an unchaste woman. She
performs her household duties with great attention, but her mind dwells
day and night on her paramour. Perform your duties in the world but keep
your mind always fixed on God.

The pundit finished eating his refreshments.

MASTER (to the pundit): \"You have read the Gitā, no doubt. It says that
there is a special power of God in the man who is honoured and respected
by all.\"

The pundit quoted the verse from the Gitā.

MASTER: \"You surely possess divine power.\"

PUNDIT: \"Shall I labour with perseverance to finish the task that I
have accepted?\"

Sri Ramakrishna forced himself, as it were, to say, \"Yes.\" He soon
changed the conversation.

MASTER: \"One cannot but admit the manifestation of power. Vidyasagar
once asked me, \'Has God given more power to some than to others?\' I
said to him: \'Certainly. Otherwise, how can one man kill a hundred? If
there is no special manifestation of power, then why is Queen Victoria
so much honoured and respected? Don\'t you admit it?\' He agreed with
me.\"

The pundit and his friends saluted the Master and were about to take
their leave. Sri Ramakrishna said to the

pundit: \"Come again. One hemp-smoker rejoices in the company of another
hemp-smoker. They even embrace each other. But they hide at the sight of
people not of their own kind. A cow licks the body of her calf; but she
threatens a strange cow with her horns.\" (All laugh.)

The pundit left the room. With a smile the Master said: \"He has become
\'diluted\' even in one day. Did you notice how modest he was? And he
accepted everything I said.\"

Moonlight flooded the semicircular porch. Sri Ramakrishna was still
seated there. M. was about to leave.

MASTER (tenderly): \"Must you go now?\"

M.: \"Yes, sir. Let me say good-bye.\"

MASTER: \"I have been thinking of visiting the houses of the devotees. I
want to visit yours also. What do you say?\"

M.: \"That will be very fine.\"

**Thursday, July 3, 1884**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in Balarām Bose\'s house in Calcutta. It was
the day of the \"Return Car Festival\". The Lord of the Universe was
worshipped in Balarām\'s house as Jagannath. There was a small car in
the house for use during the Car Festival.

**Balarām\'s father**

Balarām\'s father was a pious Vaishnava who devoted most of his time to
prayer and meditation in his garden house at Vrindāvan. He also studied
devotional books and enjoyed the company of devotees. Balarām had
brought his father to Calcutta to meet the Master.

Sri Ramakrishna was in a very happy mood. Seated near him were Ram,
Balarām, Balarām\'s father, M., Manomohan, and several young devotees.
He was conversing with them.

**Dogmatism in religion**

MASTER (to Balarām\'s father and the others): \"The Bhaktamala is one of
the Vaishnava books. It is a fine book. It describes the lives of the
various Vaishnava devotees. But it is one-sided. At one place the author
found peace of mind only after compelling Bhagavati, the Divine Mother,
to take Her initiation according to the Vaishnava discipline.

\"Once I spoke highly of Vaishnavcharan to Mathur and persuaded him to
invite Vaishnavcharan to his house. Mathur welcomed him with great
courtesy. He fed his guest from silver plates. Then do you know what
happened? Vaishnav said in front of Mathur, \'You will achieve nothing
whatsoever in spiritual life unless you accept Krishna as your Ideal.\'
Mathur was a follower of the Sakta cult and a worshipper of the Divine
Mother. At once his face became crimson. I nudged Vaishnavcharan.

\"I understand that the Bhagavata also contains some statements like
that. I hear that it is said there that trying to cross the ocean of the
world without accepting Krishna as the Ideal Deity is like trying to
cross a great sea by holding the tail of a dog. Each sect magnifies its
own view.

\"The Saktas, too, try to belittle the Vaishnavas. The Vaishnavas say
that Krishna alone is the Helmsman to take one across the ocean of the
world. The Saktas retort: \'Oh, yes! We agree to that. Our Divine Mother
is the Empress of the Universe. Why should She bother about a
ferry-boat? Therefore She has engaged that fellow Krishna for the
purpose.\' (All laugh.)

\"Besides, how vain people are about their own sects! There are weavers
in the villages near Kamarpukur. Many

of them are Vaishnavas and like to talk big. They say: \'Which Vishnu
does he worship? The Preserver? Oh, we wouldn\'t touch him!\' Or:
\'Which Śiva are you talking about? We accept the Atmaramasiva.\' Or
again, \'Please explain to us which Hari you worship\'. They spin their
yarn and indulge in talk like that.

\"Rati\'s mother, Rani Katyayani\'s favourite confidante, is a follower
of Vaishnavcharan. She is a bigoted Vaishnava. She used to visit me very
frequently, and none could outdo her in devotion. One day she noticed me
eating the prasad from the Kāli temple. Since then I haven\'t seen even
her shadow.

**Master\'s harmony of religions**

\"He is indeed a real man who has harmonized everything. Most people are
one-sided. But I find that all opinions point to the One. All views-the
Sakta, the Vaishnava, the Vedānta-have that One for their centre. He who
is formless is, again, endowed with form. It is He who appears in
different forms: The attributeless Brahman is my Father. God with
attributes is my Mother. Whom shall I blame? Whom shall I praise? The
two pans of the scales are equally heavy.\'

\"He who is described in the Vedas is also described in the Tantras and
the Puranas. All of them speak about the one Satchidananda. The Nitya
and the Lila are the two aspects of the one Reality. It is described in
the Vedas as \'Om Satchidananda Brahman\', in the Tantras as \'Om
Satchidananda Śiva\', the ever-pure Śiva, and in the Puranas as \'Om
Satchidananda Krishna\'. All the scriptures, the Vedas, the Puranas, and
the Tantras, speak only of one Satchidananda. It is stated in the
Vaishnava scripture that it is Krishna Himself who has become Kāli.\"

Sri Ramakrishna went to the porch for a few minutes and then returned.
As he was going out, Vishvamvhar\'s daughter, six or seven years old,
saluted him. On returning to the room, the Master began talking to the
little girl and her companions, who were of the same age.

THE CHILD (to the Master): \"I saluted you and you didn\'t even notice
it.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Did you? I really didn\'t notice.\"

CHILD: \"Then wait. I want to salute you again-the other foot too.\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughed and sat down. He returned the salute and bowed
to the child, touching the ground with his forehead. He asked her to
sing. The child said, \"I.swear I don\'t sing.\" When the Master pressed
her again, she said, \"Should you press me when I said \'I swear\'?\"
The Master was very happy with the children and sang light and frivolous
songs to entertain them. He sang:

> *Come, let me braid your hair,*
>
> *Lest your husband should scold you*
>
> *When he beholds you!*

The children and the devotees laughed.

**Childlike nature of a Paramahamsa**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"The paramahamsa is like a five-year-old
child. He sees everything filled with Consciousness. At one time I was
staying at Kamarpukur when Shivaram was four or five years old. One day
he was trying to catch grasshoppers near the pond. The leaves were
moving. To stop their rustling he said to the leaves: \'Hush! Hush! I
want to catch a grasshopper.\' Another day it was stormy. It rained
hard. Shivaram was with me inside the house. There were flashes of
lightning. He wanted to open the door and go out. I scolded him and
stopped him, but still he peeped out now and then. When he saw the
lightning he exclaimed, \'There, uncle! They are striking matches
again!\'

\"The paramahamsa is like a child. He cannot distinguish between a
stranger and a relative. He isn\'t particular about worldly
relationships. One day Shivaram said to me, \'Uncle, are you my
father\'s brother or his brother-

in-law?\'

\"The paramahamsa is like a child. He doesn\'t keep any track of his
whereabouts. He sees everything as Brahman. He is indifferent to his own
movements. Shivaram went to Hriday\'s house to see the Durga Puja. He
slipped out of the house and wandered away. A passer-by saw the child,
who was then only four years old, and asked, \'Where do you come from?\'
He couldn\'t say much. He only said the word \'hut\'. He was speaking of
the big hut in which the image of the Divine Mother was being
worshipped. The stranger asked him further, \'Whom are you living
with?\' He only said the word \'brother\'.

**Other traits of a Paramahamsa**

\"Sometimes the paramahamsa behaves like a madman. When I experienced
that divine madness I used to worship my own sexual organ as the
Śiva-phallus. But I. can\'t do that now. A few days after the dedication
of the temple at Dakshineswar, a madman came there who was really a sage
endowed with the Knowledge of Brahman. He had a bamboo twig in one hand
and a potted mango-plant in the other, and was wearing torn shoes. He
didn\'t follow any social conventions. After bathing in the Ganges he
didn\'t perform any religious rites. He ate something that he carried in
a corner of his wearing-cloth. Then he entered the Kāli temple and
chanted hymns to the Deity. The temple trembled. Haladhāri was then in
the shrine. The madman wasn\'t allowed to eat at the guest-house, but he
paid no attention to this slight. He searched for food in the rubbish
heap where the dogs were eating crumbs from the discarded leaf-plates.
Now and then he pushed the dogs aside to get his crumbs. The dogs
didn\'t mind either. Haladhāri followed him and asked: \'Who are you?
Are you a purnajnani?\' The madman whispered, \'Sh! Yes, I am a
purnajnani.\' My heart began to palpitate as Haladhāri told me about it.
I clung to Hriday. I said to the Divine Mother, \'Mother, shall I too
have to pass through such a state?\' We all went to see the man. He
spoke words of great wisdom to us but behaved like a madman before
others. Haladhāri followed him a great way when he left the garden.
After passing the gate he said to Haladhāri: \'What else shall I say to
you? When you no longer make any distinction between the water of this
pool and the water of the Ganges, then you will know that you have
Perfect Knowledge.\' Saying this he walked rapidly away.\"

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk with M. Other devotees, too, were present.

MASTER (to M.): \"How do you feel about Shashadhar?\"

M: \"He is very nice.\"

MASTER: \"He is very intelligent, isn\'t he?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. He is very erudite.\"

MASTER: \"According to the Gitā there is a power of God in one who is
respected and honoured by many. But Shashadhar has still a few things to
do.

What will he accomplish with mere scholarship? He needs to practise some
austerity. It is necessary to practise some spiritual discipline.

\"Gauri Pundit practised austerity. When he chanted a hymn to the Divine
Mother, the other pundits would seem no more than earthworms.

\"Narayan Shastri was not merely a scholar, either. He practised sadhana
as well. He studied for twenty-five years without a break. Nyaya alone,
he studied for seven years. Still he would go into ecstasy while
repeating the name of Śiva. The King of Jaipur wanted to make him his
court pundit, but Narayan refused. He used to spend much time here. He
had a great desire to go to the Vasishtha Āśrama to practise tapasya. He
often spoke to me about it, but I forbade him to go there. At that he
said: \'Who knows when I shall die? When shall I practise sadhana? Any
day I may crack.\' After much insistence on his part I let him go. Some
say that he is dead, that he died while practising austerity. Others say
that he is still alive and that they saw him off on a

railway train.

**Master and Keshab**

\"Before meeting Keshab, I asked Narayan Shastri to visit him and tell
me what he thought of him. Narayan reported that Keshab was an adept in
japa. He knew astrology and remarked that Keshab had been born under a
good star. Then I went to visit Keshab in the garden house at Belgharia.
Hriday was with me. The moment I saw Keshab, I said: \'Of all the people
I see here, he alone has dropped his tail. He can now live on land as
well as in water, like a frog.\'

\"Keshab sent three members of the Brahmo Samaj to the temple garden at
Dakshineswar to test me. Prasanna was one of them. They were
commissioned to watch me day and night, and to report to Keshab. They
were in my room and intended to spend the night there. They constantly
uttered the word \'Dayamaya\' and said to me: \'Follow Keshab Babu. That
will do you good.\' I said, \'I believe in God with form.\' Still they
went on with their exclamations of \'Dayamaya!\' Then a strange mood
came over me. I said to them, \'Get out of here!\' I didn\'t allow them
to spend the night in my room. So they slept on the verandah. Captain
also spent the night in the temple garden the first time he visited me.

\"Michael visited the temple garden when Narayan Shastri was living with
me. Dwarika Babu, Mathur\'s eldest son, brought him here. The owners of
the temple garden were about to get into a lawsuit with the English
proprietors of the neighbouring powder magazine; so they wanted
Michael\'s advice. I met him in the big room next to the manager\'s
office. Narayan Shastri was with me. I asked Narayan to talk to him.
Michael couldn\'t talk very well in Sanskrit. He made mistakes. Then
they talked in the popular dialect. Narayan Shastri asked him his reason
for giving up the Hindu religion. Pointing to his stomach, Michael said,
\'It was for this.\' Narayan said, \'What shall I say to a man who gives
up his religion for his belly\'s sake?\' Thereupon Michael asked me to
say something. I said: \'I don\'t know why, but I don\'t feel like
saying anything. Someone seems to be pressing my tongue.\' \"

MANOMOHAN: \"Mr. Choudhury will not come. He said: \'That fellow
Shashadhar from Faridpur will be there. I shall not go.\' \"

Mr. Choudhury had obtained his Master\'s degree from Calcutta
University. He drew a salary of three or four hundred rupees. After the
death of his first wife he had felt intense dispassion for the world,
but after some time he had married again. He frequently visited the
Master at the temple garden.

MASTER: \"How mean of him! He is vain of his scholarship. Besides, he
has married a second time. He looks on the world as a mere mud-puddle.

(To the devotees) \"This attachment to \'woman and gold\' makes a man
small-minded. When I first saw Haramohan he had many good traits. I
longed to see him. He was then seventeen or eighteen years old. I used
to send for him every now and then, but he wouldn\'t come. He is now
living away from the family with his wife. He had been living with his
uncle before. That was very good. He had no worldly troubles. Now he has
a separate home and does the marketing for his wife daily. The other day
he came to Dakshineswar. I said to him: \'Go away. Leave this place. I
don\'t even feel like touching you.\' \"

Sri Ramakrishna went to the inner apartments to see the Deity. He
offered some flowers. The ladies of Balarām\'s family were pleased to
see him.

The Master came back to the drawing-room and said: \"The worldly minded
practise devotions, japa, and austerity only by fits and starts. But
those who know nothing else but God repeat His name with every breath.
Some always repeat mentally, \'Om Rāma\'. Even the followers of the path
of knowledge repeat, \'Soham\', \'I am He\'. There are others whose
tongues are always moving, repeating the name of God. One should
remember and think of God constantly.\"

Pundit Shashadhar entered the room with one or two friends and saluted
the Master.

MASTER (smiling): \"We are like the bridesmaids waiting near the bed for
the arrival of the groom.\"

The pundit laughed. The room was filled with devotees, among them
Dr.Pratap and Balarām\'s father. The Master continued his talk.

MASTER (to Shashadhar): \"The first sign of knowledge is a peaceful
nature, and the second is absence of egotism. You have both. There are
other indications of a Jnāni. He shows intense dispassion in the
presence of a sādhu, is a lion when at work, for instance, when he
lectures, and is full of wit before his wife. (All laugh.)

\"But the nature of the vijnāni is quite different, as was the case with
Chaitanyadeva. He acts like a child or a madman or an inert thing or a
ghoul. While in the mood of a child, he sometimes shows childlike
guilelessness, sometimes the frivolity of adolescence, and sometimes,
while instructing others, the strength of a young man.\"

**Three kinds of bhakti**

PUNDIT: \"By what kind of bhakti does one realize God?\"

MASTER: \"Three kinds of bhakti are found, according to the nature of
the man: sattvic bhakti, rajasic bhakti, and tamasic bhakti.

\"Sattvic bhakti is known to God alone. It makes no outward display. A
man with such devotion loves privacy. Perhaps he meditates inside the
mosquito net, where nobody sees him. When this kind of devotion is
awakened, one hasn\'t long to wait for the vision of God. The appearance
of the dawn in the east shows that the sun will rise before long.

\"A man with rajasic bhakti feels like making a display of his devotion
before others. He worships the Deity with \'sixteen ingredients\',
enters the temple wearing a silk cloth, and puts around his neck a
string of rudrāksha beads interspersed here and there with beads of gold
and ruby.

\"A man with tamasic bhakti shows the courage and boisterousness of a
highway robber. A highway robber goes on his expedition openly,
shouting, \'Kill! Plunder!\' He isn\'t afraid even of eight police
inspectors. The devotee with tamasic bhakti also shouts like a
madman:\'Hara! Hara! Vyom! Vyom! Victory to Kāli!\' He has great
strength of mind and burning faith.

\"A Sakta has such faith. He says: \'What? I have uttered once the name
of Kāli and of Durga! I have uttered once the name of Rāma! Can there be
any sin in me?\'

\"The Vaishnavas have a very humble and lowly attitude. (Looking at
Balarām\'s father) They tell their rosary and whine and whimper: \'O
Krishna, be gracious to us! We are wretched! We are sinners!\'

**Faith in God\'s name**

\"A man should have such fiery faith as to be able to say, \'I have
uttered the name of God; how can I be a sinner?\' Imagine a man
repeating the name of Hari day and night and at the same time saying
that he is a sinner!\"

So saying, Sri Ramakrishna became overwhelmed with divine ecstasy and
sang:

> *If only I can pass away repeating Durga\'s name,*
>
> *How canst Thou then, O Blessed One,*
>
> *Withhold from me deliverance,*
>
> *Wretched though I may be?*
>
> *I may have stolen a drink of wine, or killed a child unborn,*
>
> *Or slain a woman or a cow,*
>
> *Or even caused a brahmin\'s death;*
>
> *But, though it all be true,*
>
> *Nothing of this can make me feel the least uneasiness;*
>
> *For through the power of Thy sweet name*
>
> *My wretched soul may still aspire*
>
> *Even to Brahmanhood.*

He sang again:

> *Behold my Mother playing with Śiva, lost in an ecstasy of joy!*
>
> *Drunk with a draught of celestial wine, She reels, and yet She does
> not fall.*
>
> *Erect She stands on Śiva\'s bosom, and the earth trembles under Her
> tread;*
>
> *She and Her Lord are mad with frenzy, casting aside all fear and
> shame!*

Pundit Shashadhar was weeping. Vaishnavcharan, the musician, sang:

> *O tongue, always repeat the name of Mother Durga!*
>
> *Who but your Mother Durga will save you in distress?*
>
> *Thou art the heavens and the earth, and Thou the nether world;*
>
> *From Thee have the twelve Gopalas and Hari and Śiva sprung.*
>
> *The ten Embodiments of Divine Śakti art Thou,*
>
> *And Thou the ten Avatars: this time, save me Thou must!*
>
> *The moving and the unmoving, the gross and the subtle, art Thou;*
>
> *Creation and preservation art Thou, and the last dissolution.*
>
> *Thou art the Primal Root of this manifold universe;*
>
> *The Mother of the three worlds, their only Saviour, art Thou;*
>
> *Thou art the Śakti of all, and Thou Thine own Śakti, too.*

As the Master listened to the last few lines, he went into an ecstatic
mood. The Master himself sang:

1.  *Mother, for Yaśoda Thou wouldst dance, when she called Thee her
    > precious \"Blue Jewel\";*

> *Where hast Thou hidden that lovely form, O terrible Syama?*
>
> *Dance that way once for me, O Mother! Throw down Thy sword and take
> the flute; Cast off Thy garland of heads, and wear Thy wild-flower
> garland.*
>
> *If without Śiva Thou canst not dance, then let Balarama be Thy Śiva.
> Dance, O Syama, as Thou didst dance when Thou wast Krishna! Mother,
> play on Thy flute again, once so full of delight for the gopis; Play
> again on Thy magic flute, which called the cattle in from the pasture,
> Stopping the Jamuna\'s murmuring flow and turning it backward.*
>
> *Hot in the sky the sun would burn, when Yaśoda, restless for her
> Krishna, Fondly would call: \"Here, my Gopala! Cream and butter-eat
> them, my Darling!\" And she would comb His long black hair and
> carefully braid it.*
>
> *Bending Thy supple body, Mother, both at the neck, the waist, and the
> knee,*
>
> *Thou didst dance with Thy friend Sridāmā, while Thy two anklets
> played the music: Ta-thaia! Ta-thaia! Ta-ta! Thaia-thaia!*
>
> *Hearing their captivating sound, the gopis would rush there.*

Again Pundit Shashadhar shed tears of love.

Sri Ramakrishna came down to consciousness of the world. Pointing to
Shashadhar, he said to M., \"Why don\'t you prod him?\" He wanted M. or
some other devotee to ask Shashadhar a question.

RAMDAYAL (to Shashadhar): \"The scriptures speak of Brahman\'s form as a
projection of mind. Who is it that projects?\"

SHASHADHAR: \"It is Brahman Itself that does so. It is no projection of
a man\'s mind.\"

PRATAP: \"Why does Brahman project the form?\"

MASTER: \"You ask why? Brahman doesn\'t act in consultation with others.
It is Brahman\'s pleasure. Brahman is self-willed. Why should we try to
know the reason for Brahman\'s acting this way or that? You have come to
the orchard to eat mangoes. Eat the mangoes. What is the good of
calculating how many trees there are in the orchard, how many thousands
of branches, and how many millions of leaves? One cannot realize Truth
by futile arguments and reasoning.\"

PRATAP: \"Shouldn\'t we reason any more then?\"

MASTER: \"I am asking you not to indulge in futile reasoning. But
reason, by all means, about the Real and the unreal, about what is
permanent and what is transitory. You must reason when you are overcome
by lust, anger, or grief.\"

SHASHADHAR: \"That is different. It is called reasoning based on
discrimination.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, discrimination between the Real and the unreal.\"

All sat in silence. Again the Master spoke, addressing the pundit.

MASTER: \"Formerly many great men used to come here.\"

SHASHADHAR: \"You mean rich people?\"

MASTER: \"No. Great scholars.\"

In the mean time the small car of Jagannath had been brought to the
verandah. Inside the car were the images of Krishna, Balarama, and
Subhadra. They were adorned with flowers, garlands, jewelry, and yellow
apparel. Balarām was a sattvic worshipper: there was no outward grandeur
in his worship. Outsiders did not even know of this Car Festival at his
house. The Master and the devotees went to the verandah. Sri Ramakrishna
pulled the car by the rope. Then he began to sing:

> *See how all Nadia is shaking*
>
> *Under the waves of Gaurānga\'s love. . . .*

He sang again:

> *Behold, the two brothers have come, who weep while chanting Hari\'s
> name, The brothers who, in return for blows, offer to sinners Hari\'s
> love. . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna danced with the devotees. The musician and his party
joined the Master in the music and dancing. Soon the whole verandah was
filled with people. The ladies witnessed this scene of joy from an
adjoining room. It appeared as if Chaitanya himself were dancing with
his devotees, intoxicated with divine love.

It was not yet dusk. Sri Ramakrishna returned to the drawing-room with
the devotees.

MASTER (to Shashadhar): \"This is called bhajanananda, the bliss of
devotees in the worship of God. Worldly people keep themselves engrossed
in the joy of sensuous objects, of \'woman and gold\'. Through worship
devotees receive the grace of God, and then His vision. Then they enjoy
Brahmananda, the Bliss of Brahman.\"

Shashadhar and the devotees listened to these words with rapt attention.

SHASHADHAR (humbly): \"Sir, please tell us what kind of yearning gives
one this blissful state of mind.\"

MASTER: \"One feels restless for God when one\'s soul longs for His
vision. The guru said to the disciple: \'Come with me. I shall show you
what kind of longing will enable you to see God.\' Saying this, he took
the disciple to a pond and pressed his head under the water. After a few
moments he released the disciple and asked, \'How did you feel?\' The
disciple answered: \'Oh, I felt as if I were dying! I was longing for a
breath of air.\' \"

SHASHADHAR: \"Yes! Yes! That\'s it. I understand it now.\"

MASTER: \"To love God is the essence of the whole thing. Bhakti alone is
the essence. Nārada said to Rāma, \'May I always have pure love for Your
Lotus Feet; and may I not be deluded by Your world-bewitching māyā!\'
Rāma said to him, \'Ask for some other boon.\' \'No,\' said Nārada, \'I
don\'t want anything else. May I have love for Your Lotus Feet. This is
my only prayer.\' \"

Pundit Shashadhar was ready to leave. Sri Ramakrishna asked a devotee to
bring a carriage for the pundit.

SHASHADHAR: \"Don\'t trouble yourself. I shall walk.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Oh, how can that be? \'You are beyond the reach of
even Brahma\'s meditation.\' \"

SHASHADHAR: \"There is no particular need of my going just now. The only
thing is that I shall have to perform my sandhya.\"

MASTER: \"The Divine Mother has taken away my sandhya and other
devotions. The purpose of the sandhya is to purify body and mind. I am
no longer in that state.\"

The Master sang the following lines of a song:

> *When will you learn to lie, O mind, in the abode of Blessedness,*
>
> *With Cleanliness and Defilement on either side of you?*
>
> *Only when you have found the way*
>
> *To keep these wives contentedly under a single roof,*
>
> *Will you behold the matchless form of Mother Syama.*

Pundit Shashadhar saluted the Master and went away.

RAM: \"I visited Shashadhar yesterday. You asked me to.\"

MASTER: \"Did I? I don\'t remember. But it is nice that you went.\"

RAM: \"The editor of a newspaper was abusing you.\"

MASTER: \"Suppose he was. What does it matter?\"

RAM: \"Please listen. Then I began to talk to the editor about you. He
wanted to hear more and wouldn\'t let me go.\"

It was dusk. Sri Ramakrishna began to chant the names of the Divine
Mother, Krishna, Rāma, and Hari. The devotees sat in silence. The Master
chanted the names in such sweet tones that the hearts of the devotees
were deeply touched. That day Balarām\'s house was like Navadvip when
Chaitanya lived there. On the verandah it was like Navadvip, and in the
parlour it was like Vrindāvan.

That same night Sri Ramakrishna was to go to Dakshineswar. Balarām took
him into the inner apartments and served him with refreshments. The
ladies of the family saluted the Master.

The devotees were singing kirtan in the drawing-room, awaiting the
Master\'s coming. Presently Sri Ramakrishna came and joined the singers.

The kirtan went on:

> *Behold, my Gora is dancing! With the devotees*
>
> *He dances in Srivas\'s courtyard, singing the kirtan.*
>
> *Gora says to all, \"Repeat the name of Hari!\"*
>
> *He looks at Gadadhar, and from his red eyes*
>
> *Are flowing tears of love over his golden body.*

The Master improvised the lines:

> *Gora is dancing in the kirtan:*
>
> *There he dances, Sachi\'s darling!*
>
> *There he dances, my Gaurānga!*
>
> *There he dances, my soul\'s beloved!*
>
> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 26**

FESTIVAL AT ADHAR\'S HOUSE

> Sunday, August 3, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in his room in the temple garden at
Dakshineswar after his midday meal. A

party of Bauls from Shibpur, several devotees from Bhawanipur, Balarām,
and M. were in the room. Rākhāl,

Lātu, and Harish were then living with the Master. They too were
present.

The Master began the conversation by addressing the Baul musicians from
Shibpur.

**Yoga and the six centres**

MASTER: \"Yoga is not possible if the mind dwells on \'woman and gold\'.
The mind of a worldly man generally

moves among the three lower centres: those at the navel, at the sexual
organ, and at the organ of evacuation. After great effort and spiritual
practice the Kundalini is awakened. According to the yogis there are
three nerves in the spinal column: Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna. Along the
Sushumna are six lotuses, or centres, the lowest being known as the
Muladhara. Then come successively Svadhisthana, Manipura, Anāhata,
Visuddha, and Ājnā. These are the six centres. The Kundalini, when
awakened, passes through the lower centres and comes to the Anāhata,
which is at the heart. It stays there. At that time the mind of the
aspirant is withdrawn from the three lower centres. He feels the
awakening of Divine Consciousness and sees Light. In mute wonder he sees
that radiance and cries out: \'What is this? What is this?\'

\"After passing through the six centres, the Kundalini reaches the
thousand petalled lotus known as the Sahasrara, and the aspirant goes
into *samādhi*.

\"According to the Vedas these centres are called \'bhumi\', \'planes\'.
There are seven such planes. The centre at the heart corresponds to the
fourth plane of the Vedas. According to the Tantra there is in this
centre a lotus called Anāhata, with twelve petals.

\"The centre known as Visuddha is the fifth plane. This centre is at the
throat and has a lotus with sixteen petals. When the Kundalini reaches
this plane, the devotee longs to talk and hear only about God.
Conversation on worldly subjects, on \'woman and gold\', causes him
great pain. He leaves a place where people talk of these matters.

\"Then comes the sixth plane, corresponding to the centre known as Ājnā.
This centre is located between the eyebrows and it has a lotus with two
petals. When the Kundalini reaches it, the aspirant sees the form of
God. But still there remains a slight barrier between the devotee and
God. It is like a light inside a lantern. You may think you have touched
the light, but in reality you cannot because of the barrier of glass.

\"And last of all is the seventh plane, which, according to Tantra, is
the centre of the thousand-petalled lotus. When the Kundalini arrives
there, the aspirant goes into *samādhi*. In that lotus dwells
Satchidananda Shiva, the Absolute. There Kundalini, the awakened Power,
unites with Shiva. This is known as the union of Shiva and Śakti.

**The state of *samādhi***

\"When the Kundalini rises to the Sahasrara and the mind goes into
*samādhi*, the aspirant loses all consciousness of the outer world. He
can no longer retain his physical body. If milk is poured into his
mouth, it runs out again. In that state the life-breath lingers for
twenty-one days and then passes out. Entering the \'black waters\' of
the ocean, the ship never comes back. But the Isvarakotis, such as the
Incarnations of God, can come down from this state of *samādhi*. They
can descend from this exalted state because they like to live in the
company of devotees and enjoy the love of God. God retains in them the
\'ego of Knowledge\' or the \'ego of Devotion\' so that they may teach
men. Their minds move between the sixth and the seventh planes. They run
a boat-race back and forth, as it were, between these two planes.

**Keeping individuality after *samādhi***

\"After attaining *samādhi* some souls of their own accord keep the
\'ego of Knowledge\'. But that ego does not create any attachment. It is
like a line drawn on the water.

\"Hanuman kept the \'servant ego\' after realizing God in both His
Personal and His Impersonal aspects. He thought of himself as the
servant of God. The great sages, such as Nārada, Sanaka, Sananda,
Sanatana, and Sanatkumāra, after attaining the Knowledge of Brahman,
kept the \'servant ego\' and the \'ego of Devotion\'. They are like big
steamships, which not only cross the ocean themselves but carry many
passengers to the other shore.

**Two classes of Paramahamsas**

\"There are two classes of paramahamsas, one affirming the formless
Reality and the other affirming God with form. Trailanga Swami believed
in the formless Reality. Paramahamsas like him care for their own good
alone; they feel satisfied if they themselves attain the goal.

**Paramahamsas as teachers of men**

\"But those paramahamsas who believe in God with form keep the love of
God even after attaining the Knowledge of Brahman, so that they may
teach spiritual truth to others. They are like a pitcher brimful of
water. Part of the water may be poured into another pitcher. These
perfected souls describe to others the various spiritual disciplines by
which they have realized God. They do this only to teach others and to
help them in spiritual life. With great effort men dig a well for
drinking water, using spades and baskets for the purpose. After the
digging is over, some throw the spades and other implements into the
well, not needing them any more. But some put them away near the well,
so that others may use them.

\"Some eat mangoes secretly and remove all trace of them by wiping their
mouths with a towel. But some share the fruit with others. There are
sages who, even after attaining Knowledge, work to help others and also
to enjoy the Bliss of God in the company of devotees. \'I want to eat
sugar. I don\'t want to be sugar.\'

\"The Gopis of Vrindāvan, too, attained the Knowledge of Brahman; but
they were not seeking It. They wanted to enjoy God, looking on
themselves as His mother, His friend, His handmaid, or His lover.\"

The Bauls from Shibpur began to sing to the accompaniment of a stringed
instrument. A line in the first song was:

We are sinners: redeem us, O merciful Lord!

MASTER (to the devotees): \"It is the attitude of a beginner to worship
God out of fear. Please sing about God-realization-songs expressing
divine joy.

(To Rākhāl ) \"How well they sang that song the other day at Nabin
Niyogi\'s house: \'Be drunk, O mind, be drunk with the Wine of Heavenly
Bliss\'! While singing religious songs one should not constantly refer
to one\'s worries. One should rather feel joyous and ecstatic as one
chants God\'s name.

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, won\'t you sing?\"

MASTER: \"What shall I sing? Well, I may sing when the spirit moves
me.\"

Master sings of divine joy

After a few minutes the Master began to sing. His eyes were turned
upward.

He sang:

> *Behold the waves of Gora\'s ecstatic love;*
>
> *Under them all the universe lies submerged!*
>
> *And in his love I, too, long to be drowned.*
>
> *O friend, Gaurānga\'s love has swallowed me;*
>
> *Who else feels for our misery like Gaurānga,*
>
> *Dragging us from the mire of worldliness?*

He sang again:

> *Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God\'s Beauty; If you
> descend to the uttermost depths, There you will find the gem of Love.
> . . .*

Then he sang about the Divine Mother:

> *Can everyone have the vision of Syama?*
>
> *Is Kāli\'s treasure for everyone?*
>
> *Oh, what a pity my foolish mind will not see what is true! . . .*

He continued:

> *The black bee of my mind is drawn in sheer delight*
>
> *To the blue lotus flower of Mother Syama\'s feet. . . .*

And again:

> *O Mother, what a machine is this that Thou hast made!*
>
> *What pranks Thou playest with this toy*
>
> *Three and a half cubits high! . . .*

As Sri Ramakrishna sang the last song he went into *samādhi*. The
devotees sat speechless, gazing at his radiant figure. After some time
he regained partial consciousness of the world and began to talk to the
Divine Mother.

The Master said, \"Mother, please come down from up there.\" Did he feel
his mind still lingering in the seventh plane of consciousness, the
thousand petalled lotus of the Sahasrara? \"Please do come down\", he
said. \"Don\'t torment me that way. Be still, Mother, and sit down.

\"O Mother, everybody\'s future is determined by the tendencies of his
previous births. What shall I say to these people? Nothing can be
achieved without discrimination and renunciation.\"

**Renunciation, true and false**

Sri Ramakrishna had now regained full consciousness of the world, and he
continued: \"There are many kinds of renunciation. One of them may be
called \'Markata Vairāgya\', \'Monkey Renunciation\'. It is a false
renunciation stimulated by the afflictions of the world. That
renunciation doesn\'t last long. Then there is real renunciation. A man
with everything in the world, lacking nothing, feels all to be unreal.

\"It is not possible to acquire renunciation all at once. The time
factor must be taken into account. But it is also true that a man should
hear about it. When the right time comes, he will say to himself, \'Oh
yes, I heard about this.\'

\"You must also remember another thing. By constantly hearing about
renunciation one\'s desire for worldly objects gradually wears away. One
should take rice-water in small doses to get rid of the intoxication of
liquor. Then one gradually becomes normal.

\"An aspirant entitled to the Knowledge of God is very rare. It is said
in the Gitā that one in thousands desires to know God, and again, that
among thousands who have such a desire, only one is able to know Him.\"

A devotee quoted the text from the Gitā.

MASTER: \"As your attachment to the world diminishes, your spiritual
knowledge will increase. Attachment to the world means attachment to
\'woman and gold\'.

**Prema, the rarest love of God**

\"It is not given to everybody to feel prema, ecstatic love of God.
Chaitanya experienced it. An ordinary man can at the most experience
bhava. Only the Isvarakotis, such as Divine Incarnations, experience
prema. When prema is awakened the devotee not only feels the world to be
unreal, but forgets even the body, which everyone loves so intensely.

\"In a Persian book it is said that inside the skin is the flesh, inside
the flesh the bone, inside the bone the marrow, and so on, but that
prema is the innermost of all. One becomes soft and tender through
prema. On account of this prema, Krishna became tribhanga.

\"Prema is the rope by which you can tether God, as it were. Whenever
you want to see Him you have merely to pull the rope. Whenever you call
Him, He will appear before you.

\"The mature stage of bhakti is bhava. When one attains it one remains
speechless, thinking of Satchidananda. The feeling of an ordinary man
can go only that far. When bhava ripens it becomes mahabhava. Prema is
the last. You know the difference between a green mango and a ripe one.
Unalloyed love of God is the essential thing. All else is unreal.

\"Once Rāma was pleased with the prayer of Nārada and told him to ask
for a boon. Nārada prayed for pure love and said further, \'O Rāma,
please grant that I may not be deluded by Thy world-bewitching māyā.\'
Rāma said: \'That is all right. But ask for something else.\' Nārada
replied: \'I don\'t want anything else. I pray only for pure love.\'

**How to attain pure love of God**

\"How can a devotee attain such love? First, the company of holy men.
That awakens śraddhā, faith in God. Then comes nishtha, single-minded
devotion to the Ideal. In that stage the devotee does not like to hear
anything but talk about God. He performs only those acts that please
God. After nishtha comes bhakti, devotion to God; then comes bhava. Next
mahabhava, then prema, and last of all the attainment of God Himself.
Only for Isvarakotis, such as the Incarnations, is it possible to have
mahabhava or prema.

**How to attain pure love of God**

\"The knowledge of a worldly person, the knowledge of a devotee, and the
Knowledge of an Incarnation are by no means of the same degree. The
knowledge of a worldly person is like the light of an oil lamp, which
shows only the inside of a room. Through such knowledge he eats and
drinks, attends to household duties, protects his body, brings up his
children, and so on.

\"The knowledge of a devotee is like the light of the moon, which
illumines objects both inside and outside a room. But such light does
not enable him to see a distant or a very minute object.

\"The Knowledge of an Incarnation of God is like the light of the sun.
Through that light the Incarnation sees everything, inside and outside,
big and small.

\"The mind of a worldly person is, no doubt, like muddy water; but it
can be made clear by a purifying agent. Discrimination and renunciation
are the purifying agent.\"

The Master spoke to the devotees from Shibpur.

MASTER: \"Have you any questions to ask?\"

A DEVOTEE: \"We have listened to your words.\"

**The time factor in spiritual progress**

MASTER: \"Yes, it is good to listen to these things. But nothing will
happen except at the right time. What can

quinine do for a fever patient when he runs a high temperature? Only
when his temperature comes down through the use of \'fever mixture\' or
a purgative should quinine be prescribed. There are patients who get rid
of their fever even without quinine. A child said to his mother, when he
was put to bed, \'Mother, please wake me up when I feel the call of
nature.\' The mother said: \'My child, I shall not have to wake you. The
urge itself will wake you.\'

\"Different kinds of people come here. \'Some come by boat with the
devotees. But they do not enjoy spiritual talk. They keep nudging their
friends and whispering: \'When shall we leave here? When are we going?\'
If the friends show no sign of getting up, they say, \'We would rather
wait for you in the boat.\'

\"Those who have a human body for the first time need the experience of
sense enjoyments. Spiritual consciousness is not awakened unless certain
duties have been performed.\"

The Master was going to the pine-grove. With a smile he said to M., on
the semicircular porch, \"Well, what do you think of my state of mind?\"

1.  (smiling): \"On the surface you are very simple, but inwardly very
    deep. It is extremely difficult to understand you.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"True. It is like the cement floor of a house. People
see only the outer surface and do not know how many materials there are
under it.\"

It was about four o\'clock in the afternoon. Balarām and several other
devotees got into a country boat to return to Calcutta. It was ebb-tide
in the Ganges. A gentle breeze was blowing from the south, covering the
bosom of the sacred river with ripples. M. looked at the scene a long
time. As the boat disappeared in the direction of Calcutta, he came back
to the Master.

Sri Ramakrishna was going to the pine-grove. A beautiful, dark
rain-cloud was to be seen in the northwest.

The Master asked M.: \"Do you think it will rain? Please bring my
umbrella.\" M. brought the umbrella.

Reaching the Panchavati, the Master said to Lātu, who also accompanied
him, \"Why do you look so sickly?\"

LĀTU: \"I can hardly eat anything.\"

MASTER: \"Is that the only reason? It is also a bad time of the year.
Are you meditating too much? (To M.) I have a request to make of you.
Please tell Baburam to stay with me a day or two during Rākhāl \'s
absence. Otherwise I shall feel very unhappy.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. I shall tell him.\"

Sri Ramakrishna asked M. whether he thought that Baburam was guileless.

Presently the Master left them, going in the direction of the
pine-trees. After a few minutes M. and Lātu, standing in the Panchavati,
saw the Master coming back toward them. Behind him the sky was black
with the rain-cloud. Its reflection in the Ganges made the water darker.
The disciples felt that the Master was God Incarnate, a Divine Child
five years old, radiant with the smile of innocence and purity. Around
him were the sacred trees of the Panchavati under which he had practised
spiritual discipline and had beheld visions of God. At his feet flowed
the sacred river Ganges, the destroyer of man\'s sins. The presence of
this God-man charged the trees, shrubs, flowers, plants, and temples
with spiritual fervour and divine joy.

Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room and sat on the small couch. He
began to praise a medicine that a certain brahmachari had prepared for
him. Referring to this man, Hazra said: \"He is now entangled in many
worldly anxieties. What a shame! Look at Nabai Chaitanya of Konnagar.
Though a householder, he has put on a red cloth.\"

MASTER: \"What shall I say? I clearly see that it is God Himself who has
assumed all these human forms.

Therefore I cannot take anybody to task.\"

HAZRA: \"Narendra is again involved in a lawsuit.\"

MASTER: \"He doesn\'t believe in Śakti, the Divine Mother. If one
assumes a human body, one must recognize Her.\"

HAZRA: \"Narendra says: \'If I believed in Śakti, all would follow me.
Therefore I cannot.\' \"

MASTER: \"But it is not good for him to go to the extreme of denying the
Divine Mother. He is now under Śakti\'s jurisdiction. Even a judge,
while giving evidence in a case, comes down and stands in the
witness-box.

(To M.) \"Have you seen Narendra lately?\"

M: \"Not during the last few days.\"

MASTER: \"See him and bring him here in a carriage.

(To Hazra) \"Well, what is his relation to this \[meaning himself\]?\"

HAZRA: \"He expects help from you.\"

MASTER: \"And what about Bhavanath? Would he come here so frequently if
he didn\'t have good tendencies? What about Harish and Lātu? They always
meditate. Why is that?\"

HAZRA: \"That\'s right. Why should they devote all their time to
meditation? It is quite a different thing for them to stay here to
attend to your personal needs.\"

MASTER: \"Possibly you are right. Perhaps others may take their place
now.\"

Hazra left the room, leaving the Master alone with M.

MASTER: \"Does what I say in the state of ecstasy attract people?\"

M: \"Oh, yes. Very much.\"

MASTER: \"What do people think of me? Do they think anything in
particular about me when they see me in that condition?\"

1.  \"We feel in you a wonderful synthesis of knowledge, love, and
    renunciation, and on the surface a natural spontaneity. Many divine
    experiences have passed, like huge steamboats, through the deep of
    your inner consciousness; still you maintain outwardly this utter
    simplicity. Many cannot understand it, but a few are attracted by
    this state alone.\"

MASTER: \"There is a sect of Vaishriavas known as the Ghoshpara, who
describe God as the \'Sahaja\', the \'Simple One\'. They say further
that a man cannot recognize this \'Simple One\' unless he too is simple.
(To M.) Have I any ego?\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. A little. You have kept it to preserve your body, and to
    enjoy divine love in the company of the devotees and impart
    spiritual knowledge to them. Further, you have kept this trace of
    ego by praying to the Divine Mother for it.\"

MASTER: \"No. I have not kept it. It is God Himself who has left it in
me. Can you tell me how I appear in the state of *samādhi*?\"

M: \"As you said a little while ago, you see the form of God when your
mind rises to the \'sixth plane\'. When

you speak after that, your mind comes down to the \'fifth plane\'.\"

MASTER: \"It is God who does all these things. I do not know anything.\"

1.  \"That is why you attract people so much. Sir, I have a question to
    ask. There are two opinions in the scriptures. According to one,
    Purana, Krishna is Chidatma, the Absolute, and *Radha* is ChitŚakti,
    Its Divine Power; but according to another, Krishna Himself is Kāli;
    the Primordial Energy.\"

MASTER: \"This second view is held in the Devi Purana. According to it,
Kāli Herself has become Krishna; But what difference does it make? God
is infinite, and infinite are the ways to reach Him.\"

1.  remained speechless with wonder for a few moments and then said:
    \"Oh, now I understand. As you say, the important thing is to climb
    to the roof. Our goal will be achieved if we can accomplish it by
    following any of the means-a rope or a pole.\"

MASTER: \"It is through the grace of God that you have understood that.
Without His grace doubt is never cleared up.

**Master teaches M**

*\"T*he important thing is somehow to cultivate devotion to God and love
for Him. What is the use of knowing many things? It is enough to
cultivate love of God by following any of the paths. When you have this
love, you are sure to attain God. Afterwards, if it is necessary, God
will explain everything to you and tell you about the other paths as
well. It is enough for you to develop love of God. You have no need of
many opinions and discussions. You have come to the orchard to eat
mangoes. Enjoy them to your heart\'s content. You don\'t need to count
the branches and leaves on the trees. It is wise to follow the attitude
of Hanuman: \'I do not know the day of the week, the phase of the moon,
or the position of the stars; I only contemplate Rāma.\' \"

1.  \"I now desire that my activities may be much reduced and that I may
    devote myself greatly to God.\" MASTER: \"Ah! Certainly your desire
    will be fulfilled. But a Jnāni can live unattached in the world.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"True, sir. But one needs special power to lead an unattached
    life.\"

MASTER: \"That is also true. But perhaps you wanted the worldly life.
Krishna had been enshrined in Radha\'s heart; but *Radha* wanted to
sport with Him in human form. Hence all the episodes of Vrindāvan. Now
you should pray to God that your worldly duties may be reduced. And you
will achieve the goal if you renounce mentally.\"

1.  \"But mental renunciation is prescribed for those who cannot give up
    the world outwardly. For superior devotees total renunciation is
    enjoined-both outer and inner.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was silent a few minutes and then resumed the
conversation.

MASTER: \"How did you like what I said about renunciation a little while
ago?\"

M: \"Very much, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Tell me, what is the meaning of renunciation?\"

1.  \"Renunciation does not mean simply dispassion for the world. It
    means dispassion for the world and also longing for God.\"

MASTER: \"You are right. You no doubt need money for your worldly life;
but don\'t worry too much about it.

The wise course is to accept what comes of its own accord. Don\'t take
too much trouble to save money.

Those who surrender their hearts and souls to God, those who are devoted
to Him and have taken refuge in

Him, do not worry much about money. As they earn, so they spend. The
money comes in one way and goes out the other. This is what the Gitā
describes as \'accepting what comes of its own accord\'.\"

The Master referred to Haripada and said, \"He came here the other
day.\"

1.  \"He knows how to sing the stories of the Purana. He sings
    melodiously about the life of Prahlada and the nativity of Sri
    Krishna.\"

MASTER: \"Is that so? That day I looked into his eyes. They had an
inward look. I asked him whether he meditated a great deal, but he sat
with his eyes cast down and didn\'t answer. Then I said to him, \'Look
here, don\'t strain yourself too much.\' \"

It was now dusk. Sri Ramakrishna, as was usual with him during this part
of the day, chanted the names of God and turned his mind to
contemplation. Soon the moon rose in the sky. The temples, courtyards,
and trees were bathed in its silvery light, and millions of broken moons
played on the rippling surface of the Ganges. Rākhāl and M. were with
the Master in his room.

MASTER (to M.): \"Baburam says, \'Oh, the worldly life! God forbid!\' \"

1.  \"His opinion is based on mere hearsay. What does he know of the
    world? He is a mere child.\" MASTER: \"Yes, that is true. Have you
    noticed Niranjan? He is utterly artless.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Yes, sir. His very appearance attracts people. How expressive his
    eyes are!\"

MASTER: \"Not only his eyes, but his entire person. His relatives
proposed that he marry. At this he said, \'Why are you going to drown
me?\' (With a smile) Tell me this. People say that a man finds great
pleasure in the company of his wife after the hard work of the day.\"

1.  \"That is no doubt true of those who think that way. (To Rākhāl ,
    with a smile) We are now being examined. This is a leading
    question.\"

Both Rākhāl and M. were married.

MASTER (with a smile): \"A mother says, \'I shall heave a sigh of relief
if I can procure a \"shade-tree\" for my son. He will rest in its shade
when scorched by the heat of the world.\' \"

1.  \"True, sir. But there are parents and parents. A father who is
    spiritually illumined doesn\'t give his children in marriage. If he
    does, his is a fine spirituality!\"

Adhar Sen arrived from Calcutta and saluted the Master. After a few
minutes, he went to the temple of Kāli, where M. followed him.

A little later M. was sitting at the *Bathing-Ghat* on the Ganges. The
flood tide had just set in. As he listened to the waters lapping against
the bank, many pictures of Sri Ramakrishna\'s divine life flitted before
his mind: the Master\'s deep *samādhi*, his constant ecstasy, his joy in
the love of God, his untiring discourse on spiritual life, his genuine
love for the devotees, and, above all, his childlike simplicity. Who was
this man? Was it God who had embodied Himself on earth for the sake of
His devotees?

Adhar and M. returned to the Master\'s room. Adhar had been to
Chittagong, in East Bengal, on official duty.

He was telling the Master about his visit to the Chandranath Hills and
Sitakunda, sacred places of Chittagong.

ADHAR: \"Near Sitakunda I visited a well where I saw fire in the water.
It is always burning on the water with leaping tongues.\"

MASTER: \"How is that possible?\"

ADHAR: \"The water contains phosphorus.\"

Presently Ram Chatterji entered the room. The Master said some kind
words about him to Adhar.

MASTER: \"Ram\'s presence in the temple garden has relieved us of many
anxieties. He searches out Harish, Lātu, and the others at meal-time.
Very often they are absorbed in meditation in some corner of the temple
garden. It is Ram who sees that they eat at the proper time.\"

**Saturday, September 6, 1884**

**Master at Adhar\'s house**

About three o\'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was seated in
Adhar\'s parlour on the second floor.

Narendra, the Mukherji brothers, Bhavanath, M., Hazra, and other
devotees were with the Master.

Arrangements were being made for Narendra to sing: While he was tuning
the Tānpura, one of the strings snapped, and the Master exclaimed, \"Oh!
What have you done?\" Narendra then tuned the drums. The Master said to
him, \"You are beating that drum, and I feel as if someone were slapping
my cheek.\"

Referring to the *Kirtan*, Narendra said: \'There is not much rhythm in
the *Kirtan*. That\'s why it is so popular and people love it so much.\"

MASTER: \"How silly! People like it because it is so tender and full of
pathos.\"

**Narendra\'s music**

Narendra sang:

> *Sweet is Thy name, a Refuge of the humble!*
>
> *It falls like sweetest nectar on our ears*
>
> *And comforts us, Beloved of our souls! . . .*

He sang again:

> *O Lord, must all my days pass by so utterly in vain?*
>
> *Down the path of hope I gaze with longing, day and night.*
>
> *Thou art the Lord of all the worlds, and I but a beggar here;*
>
> *How can I ask of Thee to come and dwell within my heart?*
>
> *My poor heart\'s humble cottage door is standing open wide;*
>
> *Be gracious, Lord, and enter there but once, and quench its thirst!*

MASTER (to Hazra, smiling): \"That was the first song he sang for me.\"

Narendra sang one or two more songs. Then Vaishnavcharan sang,
describing the grief of the gopis at the sight of Krishna as king of
Mathura:

> *O Hari, how shall we know You now?*
>
> *In Mathura\'s royal splendour You have forgotten us. . . .*

MASTER: \"Won\'t you sing that one-*\'O Vina, sing Lord Hari\'s name?\"*

Vaishnavcharan sang:

> *O Vina, sing Lord Hari\'s name!*
>
> *Without the blessing of His feet*
>
> *You cannot know the final Truth.*
>
> *The name of Hari slays all grief:*
>
> *Sing Hari\'s name! Sing Krishna\'s name!*
>
> *If only Hari shows His grace,*
>
> *Then I shall never be distressed.*
>
> *O Vina, sing His name but once;*
>
> *No earthly gem is half so rare.*
>
> *Govinda says: In vain my days*
>
> *Have passed. No longer may I float*
>
> *Here in life\'s trackless ocean waste!*

While listening to the song, the Master became abstracted. Saying \"Ah
me! Ah me!\" he went into *samādhi*.

The devotees were sitting around him, their eyes riveted on him. The
room was filled with people.

**Master in ecstasy**

The musician sang again. As he improvised new lines describing ecstatic
love of God, the Master stood up and danced. He himself improvised lines
and sang them with outstretched arms. Soon he went into *samādhi* and
sat down, with his head resting on the bolster in front of him. The
musician was also carried away with emotion and sang new songs. Sri
Ramakrishna again stood up and began to dance. The devotees could not
control themselves. They too danced with the Master. While dancing, Sri
Ramakrishna every now and then went into deep *samādhi*. When he was in
the deepest *samādhi* he could not utter a word and his whole body
remained transfixed. The devotees danced encircling him. After a while,
regaining partial consciousness, he danced with the strength of a lion,
intoxicated with ecstatic love. But even then he could not utter a word.
Finally, regaining more of the consciousness of the world, he sang
again, improvising the lines. An intense spiritual atmosphere was
created in Adhar\'s parlour. At the sound of the loud music a large
crowd had gathered in the street.

Sri Ramakrishna danced a long time in the company of the devotees. When
he resumed his seat, still tinged with the lingering glow of divine
fervour, he asked Narendra to sing \"O Mother, make me mad with Thy
love\".

Narendra sang:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason? . . .*

MASTER: \"And that one― *\'Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness\'.\"*

Narendra sang:

> *Upon the Sea of Blissful Awareness waves of ecstatic love arise:*
>
> *Rapture divine! Play of God\'s Bliss!*
>
> *Oh, how enthralling! . . .*

MASTER: \"And that one too―*\'In Wisdom\'s firmament\'.* Perhaps it is
too long. Do you think so? All right, sing it slowly.\"

Narendra sang:

> *In Wisdom\'s firmament the moon of Love is rising full,*
>
> *And Love\'s flood-tide, in surging waves, is flowing everywhere.*
>
> *O Lord, how full of bliss Thou art! Victory unto Thee! . . .*

MASTER: \"And won\'t you sing that one―*The Wine of Heavenly Bliss\'*?\"

Narendra sang:

> *Be drunk, O mind, be drunk with the Wine of Heavenly Bliss! Roll on
> the ground and weep, chanting Hari\'s sweet name! Fill the arching
> heavens with your deep lion roar, Singing Hari\'s sweet name! With
> both your arms upraised, Dance in the name of Hari and give His name
> to all.*
>
> *Swim by day and by night in the b1iss of Hari\'s love;*
>
> *Slay desire with His name, and blessed be your life!*

The Master improvised, *\"Be drunk with prema and weep, chanting Hari\'s
sweet name.\"* And, *\"Be mad with divine fervour and weep, chanting His
name.\"*

Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees rested awhile. Narendra said to the
Master in a low voice, \"Will you kindly sing that one?\"

MASTER: \"My voice has become a little hoarse.\"

After a few minutes he asked Narendra, \"Which one?\"

NARENDRA: *\"Gaur, whose beauty delights the world.\"*

Sri Ramakrishna sang, describing the beauty of Sri Chaitanya:

> *Who has brought Gaur to Nadia*
>
> *Gaur, whose beauty delights the world?*
>
> *His face, covered with ringlets of hair,*
>
> *Shines like lightning against a dark cloud. . . .*

Again he sang, this time about the grief of a Gopi at her separation
from Sri Krishna:

> *I have not found my Krishna, O friend! How cheerless my home without
> Him!*
>
> *Ah, if Krishna could only be the hair upon my head,*
>
> *Carefully I should braid it then, and deck it with bakul-flowers;*
>
> *Carefully I should fashion the braids out of my Krishna-hair.*
>
> *Krishna is black, and black is my hair; black would be one with
> black.*
>
> *Ah, if Krishna could only be the ring I wear in my nose,*
>
> *Always from my nose He would hang, and my two lips could touch Him.*
>
> *But it can never be, alas! Why should I idly dream?*
>
> *Why should Krishna care at all to be the ring in my nose?*
>
> *Ah, if Krishna could only be the bracelets on my arms,*
>
> *Always He would cling to my wrists, and proudly I should walk,*
>
> *Shaking my bracelets to make them sound, shaking my arms to show
> them; Down the king\'s highway I should walk, wearing my Krishna
> bracelets.*

The music was over. The Master began to talk with the devotees.

MASTER (smiling): \"Hazra danced.\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes, a little.\"

MASTER: \"A little?\"

NARENDRA: \"Yes. His belly danced too.\" (All laugh.)

Pundit Shashadhar\'s host had been thinking of inviting the Master for
dinner.

MASTER: \"I have heard that his host is not an honest man. He is
immoral.\"

NARENDRA: \"That is why you didn\'t drink the water he touched. It
happened the first day you met Shashadhar at his house. How did you come
to know he was immoral?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Hazra knows of another instance. It happened at
Sihore in Hriday\'s house.\"

HAZRA: \"The man was a Vaishnava. He came with me to see you \[meaning
Sri Ramakrishna\]. As soon as he sat in front of you, you turned your
back on him.\"

MASTER: \"We learnt later that he led an immoral life. (To Narendra) You
used to say, at first, that these were all hallucinations.\"

NARENDRA: \"How was I to know? Now I see that you are always right.\"

Adhar had prepared a feast for the Master and the devotees, and now he
invited them to the meal. The Master said to the Mukherji brothers:
\"What? Won\'t you eat?\" They said humbly, \"Please excuse us.\"

MASTER: \"But why? You are doing everything else. Why this hesitation
only about eating the meal?\"

Adhar was a low-caste Hindu. Therefore some of the Master\'s brahmin
devotees hesitated to eat at his house. They came to their senses at
last when they saw Sri Ramakrishna himself eating.

It was about nine o\'clock. The Master was resting in the drawing-room
with the devotees. He would soon leave for Dakshineswar.

The Mukherji brothers had arranged with a singer of *Kirtan* to
entertain the Master the following day. Ram was taking singing lessons
from this musician. Sri Ramakrishna asked Narendra to come to
Dakshineswar to hear the *Kirtan*.

MASTER (to Narendra): \"Come tomorrow, won\'t you?\"

NARENDRA: \"I shall try, sir.\"

MASTER: \"You can bathe there and also take your meal. (Pointing to M.)
He may dine there too. (To M.) Are you quite well now? I hope you are
not on a diet.\"

M: \"No, sir. I shall come.\"

Nityagopal was living at Vrindāvan. Chunilal had returned from Vrindāvan
only a few days before, and the Master inquired about Nityagopal.

As Sri Ramakrishna was about to leave, M. saluted him, touching the
Master\'s feet with his forehead. The Master said to him tenderly:
\"Then I shall see you tomorrow. Narendra! Bhavanath! Please come
tomorrow.\" Then with several devotees he set out for Dakshineswar.

The other devotees returned home in the moonlit night, cherishing in
their hearts the Master\'s ecstatic music and dancing.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 27**

AT DAKSHINESWAR

> Sunday, September 7, 1884

IT WAS ABOUT ELEVEN O\'CLOCK. The Master was sitting in his room at
Dakshineswar. He had not yet taken his midday meal.

Arrangements had been made with the musician Shyamdas to entertain the
Master and the devotees with his kirtan. Baburam, M., Manomohan,
Bhavanath, Kishori, Chunilal, Haripada, the Mukherji brothers, Ram,
Surendra, Tārak, Niranjan, and others arrived at the temple garden.
Lātu, Harish, and Hazra were staying with the Master.

When M. saluted Sri Ramakrishna, the Master asked: \"Where is Narendra?
Isn\'t he coming?\" M. told him that Narendra could not come.

A brahmin devotee was reading to the Master from a book of devotional
songs by Ramprasad. Sri Ramakrishna asked him to continue. The brahmin
read a song, the first line of which was: \"O Mother, put on Thy
clothes.\"

MASTER: \"Stop, please! These ideas are outlandish and bizarre. Read
something that will awaken bhakti.\"

The brahmin read:

> *Who is there that can understand what Mother Kāli is?*
>
> *Even the six darsanas are powerless to reveal Her. . . .*

MASTER (to M.): \"I got a pain because I lay too long on one side while
in samādhi yesterday at Adhar\'s house; so now I\'ll take Baburam with
me when I visit the houses of the devotees. He is a sympathetic soul\"

With these words the Master sang:

> *How shall I open my heart,O friend?*
>
> *It is forbidden me to speak.*
>
> *I am about to die, for lack of a kindred soul*
>
> *To understand my misery.*
>
> *Simply by looking in his eyes,*
>
> *I find the beloved of my heart;*
>
> *But rare is such a soul, who swims in ecstatic bliss*
>
> *On the high tide of heavenly love.*

MASTER: \"The Bauls sing songs like that. They also sing another kind of
song:

> *Stay your steps, O wandering monk!*
>
> *Stand there with begging-bowl in hand,*
>
> *And let me behold your radiant face.*

**Signs of a perfect soul**

\"According to the Śakti cult the siddha is called a koul, and according
to the Vedānta, a paramahamsa. The Bauls call him a sai. They say, \'No
one is greater than a sai.\' The sai is a man of supreme perfection. He
doesn\'t see any differentiation in the world. He wears a necklace, one
half made of cow bones and the other of the sacred tulsi-plant. He calls
the Ultimate Truth \'Ālekh\', the \'Incomprehensible One\'. The Vedas
call It \'Brahman\'. About the jivas the Bauls say, \'They come from
Ālekh and they go unto Ālekh.\'

That is to say, the individual soul has come from the Unmanifest and
goes back to the Unmanifest. The Bauls will ask you, \'Do you know about
the wind?\' The \'wind\' means the great currrent that one feels in the
subtle nerves, Ida, Pingala, and Sushumna, when the Kundalini is
awakened. They will ask you further, \'In which station are you
dwelling?\' According to them there are six \'stations\',

corresponding to the six psychic centres of Yoga. If they say that a man
dwells in the \'fifth station\', it means that his mind has climbed to
the fifth centre, known as the Viśuddha chakra. (To M.) At that time he
sees the Formless.\"

Saying this the Master sang:

> *Within the petals of this flower there lies concealed a subtle space,
> Transcending which, one sees at length the universe in Space
> dissolve.*

**Description of the Bauls**

\"Once a Baul came here. I asked him, \'Have you finished the task of
\"refining the syrup\"? Have you taken the pot off the stove?\' The more
you boil the juice of sugar-cane, the more it is refined. In the first
stage of boiling it is simply the juice of the sugar-cane. Next it is
molasses, then sugar, then sugar candy, and so on. As it goes on
boiling, the substances you get are more and more refined.

\"When does a man take the pot off the stove? That is, when does a man
come to the end of his sadhana? He comes to the end when he has acquired
complete mastery over his sense-organs. His sense-organs become loosened
and powerless, as the leech is loosened from the body when you put lime
on its mouth. In that state a man may live with a woman, but he does not
feel any lust for her.

\"Many of the Bauls follow a \'dirty\' method of spiritual discipline.
It is like entering a house through the back door by which the
scavengers come.

\"One day I was taking my meal when a Bāul devotee arrived. He asked me,
\'Are you yourself eating, or are you feeding someone else?\' The
meaning of his words was that the siddha sees God dwelling within a man.
The siddhas among the Bauls will not talk to persons of another sect;
they call them \'strangers\'.

\"The Bauls designate the state of perfection as the \'sahaja\', the
\'natural\' state. There are two signs of this state. First, a perfect
man will not \'smell of Krishna\'. Second, he is like the bee that
lights on the lotus but does not sip the honey. The first means, that he
keeps all his spiritual feelings within himself. He doesn\'t show
outwardly any sign of spirituality. He doesn\'t even utter the name of
Hari. The second means that he is not attached to woman. He has
completely mastered his senses.

\"The Bauls do not like the worship of an image. They want a living man.
That is why one of their sects is called the Kartabhaja. They worship
the karta, that is to say, the guru, as God.

**Different paths leading to God**

\"You see how many opinions there are about God. Each opinion is a path.
There are innumerable opinions and innumerable paths leading to God.\"

BHAVANATH: \"Then what should we do?\"

Devotion to one\'s own path and respect for others\'

MASTER: \"You must stick to one path with all your strength. A man can
reach the roof of a house by stone stairs or a ladder or a rope-ladder
or a rope or even by a bamboo pole. But he cannot reach the roof if he
sets foot now on one and now on another. He should firmly follow one
path. Likewise, in order to realize God a man

must follow one path with all his strength.

\"But you must regard other views as so many paths leading to God. You
should not feel that your path is the only right path and that other
paths are wrong. You mustn\'t bear malice toward others.

\"Well, to what path do I belong? Keshab Sen used to say to me: \'You
belong to our path. You are gradually accepting the ideal of the
formless God.\' Shashadhar says that I belong to his path. Vijay, too,
says that I belong to his―Vijay\'s― path.\"

**The tides in the Ganges**

Sri Ramakrishna walked toward the Panchavati with M. and a few other
devotees. It was midday and time for the flood-tide in the Ganges.

They waited in the Panchavati to see the bore of the tide.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"The ebb-tide and flood-tide are indeed
amazing. But notice one thing. Near the sea you see ebb-tide and
flood-tide in a river, but far away from the sea the river flows in one
direction only. What does this mean? Try to apply its significance to
your spiritual life. Those who live very near God feel within them the
currents of bhakti, bhava, and the like. In the case of a few―the
Isvarakotis, for instance―one sees even mahabhava and prema.

(To M.) \"What is the explanation of the ebb-tide and flood-tide?\"

M: \"According to Western astronomy, they are due to the attraction of
the sun and the moon.\"

In order to explain it, M. drew figures on the earth and began to show
the Master the movement of the earth, the sun, and the moon.

The Master looked at the figures for a minute and said: \"Stop, please!
It gives me a headache.\"

Presently the tide came up the Ganges. They heard the sound of the
rushing water. The tide struck the bank of the river and flowed toward
the north. Sri Ramakrishna looked at it intently and exclaimed like a
child: \"Look at that boat! I wonder what is going to happen to it.\"

The Master and M. sat down for a while in the Panchavati, Sri
Ramakrishna placing his umbrella on the cement platform. The
conversation turned to Narayan. The boy was a student. Sri Ramakrishna
looked upon him as Narayana, God Himself, and was very fond of him.

MASTER: \"Have you noticed Naran\'s nature? He can mix with all, old and
young. One cannot do this without a special power.

Besides, all love him. Is he really artless?\"

M: \"I think so.\"

MASTER: \"I understand that he goes to your place. Is that so?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. He has visited me once or twice.\"

MASTER: \"Will you give him a rupee? Or shall I ask Kāli about it?\"

M: \"Very well, sir. I shall give him the money.\"

MASTER: \"That\'s fine. It is good to help those who yearn for God. Thus
one makes good use of one\'s money. What will you gain by spending
everything on your family?\"

Kishori had several children. His salary was too small to support his
family. Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: \"Naran said he would get a job for
Kishori. Please remind him of it.\"

The Master walked away in the direction of the pine-grove. Returning to
the Panchavati, he said to M.: \"Please ask someone to spread a mat
outside my room. I shall lie down a few minutes. I am coming
presently.\"

When the Master returned to his room, he could not find his umbrella and
exclaimed: \"You have all forgotten the umbrella! The busybody doesn\'t
see a thing even when it is very near him. A man went to a friend\'s
house to light the charcoal for his smoke, though all the time he had a
lighted lantern in his hand. Another man looked everywhere for his
towel. Finally he discovered that it had been on his shoulder all the
time.\"

It was about one o\'clock in the afternoon. The Master ate the prasad
from the Kāli temple. Then he wanted to rest awhile, but the devotees
were still sitting in his room. They were asked to go out, and then the
Master lay down. He said to Baburam, \"Come here; sit near me.\" Baburam
answered, \"I am preparing betel-leaf.\" The Master said,\"Put your
betel-leaf aside\"

The devotees sat under the bakul-tree in the Panchavati. Tārak, who had
just returned from Vrindāvan, told them stories of his visit.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna was seated again on his couch, the
devotees sitting on the floor. Shyamdas was singing with his party.

He sang of the gopis\' grief at their separation from Sri Krishna:

> *Dry as a desert seemed the happy lake to them:*
>
> *The chatak died of thirst, gazing toward the clouds.*

The Master became somewhat abstracted, but the musician could not create
a spiritual atmosphere. Sri Ramakrishna asked Nabai of Konnagar to sing
a kirtan. Nabai was Manomohan\'s uncle. He lived on the bank of the
Ganges, devoting his time to prayer and meditation, and was a frequent
visitor of Sri Ramakrishna at Dakshineswar.

**Master in ecstasy**

Nabai began the kirtan in a loud voice. The Master left the couch and
began to dance. Immediately Nabai and other devotees began to dance
around him. The atmosphere became intense with spiritual fervour.

After the kirtan, Sri Ramakrishna resumed his seat. With great feeling
he began to sing of the Divine Mother, his eyes turned upward:

> *O Mother, ever blissful as Thou art,*
>
> *Do not deprive Thy worthless child of bliss!*
>
> *My mind knows nothing but Thy Lotus Feet.*
>
> *The King of Death scowls at me terribly;*
>
> *Tell me, Mother, what shall I say to him? . . .*
>
> He sang again:
>
> *As is a man\'s meditation, so is his feeling of love;*
>
> *As is a man\'s feeling of love, so is his gain;*
>
> *And faith is the root of all. . . .*
>
> He continued:
>
> *This world, O Mother, is Thy madhouse!*
>
> *What can I say of all Thy virtues?*
>
> *Setting aside Thine elephant, Thou roamest about on foot;*
>
> *Putting off Thy gems and pearls, O Self-willed Mother,*
>
> *Thou dost adorn Thy comely neck with a garland of human heads.*
>
> *Now Thou must rescue Ramprasad out of the forest of this world.*

Again he sang:

> *Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas, So
> long as I can breathe my last with Kāli\'s name upon my lips? . ..*

And again:

> *Dwell, O mind, within yourself; Enter no other\'s home.*
>
> *If you but seek there, you will find All you are searching for. . .
> .*

And then:

> *The black bee of my mind is drawn in sheer delight*
>
> *To the blue lotus flower of Mother Syama\'s feet. . . .*

And then:

> *Cherish my precious Mother Syama*
>
> *Tenderly within, O mind;*
>
> *May you and I alone behold Her,*
>
> *Letting no one else intrude. . . .*

As the Master sang this last song he stood up. He was almost intoxicated
with divine love. Again and again he said to the devotees,

\"*Cherish my precious Mother Syama tenderly within.\"*

Then he danced and sang:

> *Is Kāli, my Mother, really black?*
>
> *The Naked One, of blackest hue,*
>
> *Lights the Lotus of the Heart. . . .*

The Master reeled as he sang. Niranjan came forward to hold him. The
Master said to him softly, \"Don\'t touch me, you rascal!\"

Seeing the Master dance, the devotees stood up. He caught hold of M.\'s
hand and said: \"Don\'t be foolish! Dance!\"

Sri Ramakrishna resumed his seat, still charged with divine ecstasy.
Coming down a little to the normal state, he said: \"Om! Om! Om!

Om! Om! Om Kāli!\" Again he said, \"Let me have a smoke.\" Many of the
devotees stood around. Mahimacharan was fanning him. The Master asked
him to sit down and recite from the scriptures. Mahimacharan recited
from the Mahanirvana Tantra:

*Om; I bow to Thee, the Everlasting Cause of the world;*

*I bow to Thee, Pure Consciousness, the Soul that sustains the whole
universe.*

*I bow to Thee, who art One without duality, who dost bestow
liberation;*

1.  *bow to Thee, Brahman, the all-pervading Attributeless Reality. Thou
    alone art the Refuge, the only Object of adoration;*

*Thou art the only Cause of the universe, the Soul of everything that
is; Thou alone art the world\'s Creator, Thou its Preserver and
Destroyer;*

*Thou art the immutable Supreme Lord, the Absolute; Thou art unchanging
Consciousness. Dread of the dreadful! Terror of the terrible!*

*Refuge of all beings! Purity of purifiers!*

*Thou alone dost rule over those in the high places, Supreme over the
supreme, the Protector of protectors.*

*Almighty Lord, who art made manifest as the Form of all, yet art
Thyself unmanifest and indestructible; Thou who art imperceptible to the
senses, yet art the very Truth;*

*Incomprehensible, imperishable, all-pervading, hidden, and without
form; O Lord! O Light of the Universe! Protect us from harm.*

*On that One alone we meditate; that One is the sole object of our
worship; To That alone, the non-dual Witness of the Universe, we bow.*

*In that One who alone exists and who is our sole eternal Support, we
seek, refuge, The self-dependent Lord, the Vessel of Safety in the ocean
of existence.*

Sri Ramakrishna listened to the hymn with folded hands. After it was
sung he saluted Brahman; The devotees did likewise.

Adhar arrived from Calcutta and bowed down before the Master.

MASTER (to M.): \"We have had such joy today! How much joy Hari\'s name
creates! Is it not so?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

Mahimacharan was a student of philosophy. That day he too had chanted
the name of Hari and danced during the kirtan. This made the Master very
happy.

It was about dusk. Many of the devotees took their leave. A lamp, was
lighted in Sri Ramakrishna\'s room and incense was burnt.

After some time the moon came out, flooding the sky with its light.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on his couch. He was in a spiritual mood,
absorbed in contemplation of the Divine Mother. Now and then he chanted
Her hallowed name. Adhar was sitting on the floor. M. and Niranjan, too,
were there. Sri Ramakrishna began to talk to Adhar.

MASTER: \"What! You have come just now! We have had so much kirtan and
dancing. Shyamdas began the kirtan. He is Ram\'s music teacher. But I
didn\'t enjoy his singing very much; I didn\'t feel like dancing. Later
I heard about his character. I was told that he had as many mistresses
as there are hairs on a man\'s head.

\"Didn\'t you get the job?\"

Adhar held the post of deputy magistrate, a government post that carried
with it great prestige. He earned three hundred rupees a month. He had
applied for the office of vice-chairman of the Calcutta Municipality.
The salary attached to this office was one thousand rupees. In order to
secure it, Adhar had interviewed many influential people in Calcutta.

MASTER (to M. and Niranjan): \"Hazra said to me, \'Please pray to the
Divine Mother for Adhar, that he may

secure the job.\' Adhar made the same request to me. I said to the
Mother: \'O Mother, Adhar has been visiting You. May he get the job if
it pleases You.\' But at the same time I said to Her: \'How small-minded
he is! He is praying to You for things like that and not for Knowledge
and Devotion.\'

(To Adhar) \"Why did you dance attendance on all those small-minded
people? You have seen so much; you have heard so much!

After reading the entire Ramayana, to ask whose wife Sita is!\' \"

ADHAR: \"A man cannot but do these things if he wants to lead a
householder\'s life. You haven\'t forbidden us to, have you?\"

**Advice to Adhar about renunciation**

MASTER: \"Nivritti alone is good, and not pravritti.3 Once, when I was
in a God-intoxicated state, I was asked to go to the manager of the Kāli
temple to sign the receipt for my salary. They all do it here. But I
said to the manager: \'I cannot do that. I am not asking for any salary.
You may give it to someone else if you want.\' I am the servant of God
alone. Whom else shall I serve? Mallick noticed the late hours of my
meals and arranged for a cook. He gave me one rupee for a month\'s
expenses. That embarrassed me. I had to run to him whenever he sent for
me. It would have been quite a different thing if I had gone to him of
my own accord.

\"In leading the worldly life one has to humour mean-minded people and
do many such things. After the attainment of my exalted state, I noticed
how things were around me and said to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother!
please change the direction of my mind right now, so that I may not have
to flatter rich people.\'

(To Adhar) \"Be satisfied with the job you have. People hanker after a
post paying fifty or a hundred rupees, and you are earning three hundred
rupees! You are a deputy magistrate. I saw a deputy magistrate at
Kamarpukur. His name was Ishwar Ghosha! He had a turban on his head.
Men\'s very bones trembled before him. I remember having seen him during
my boyhood. Is a deputy magistrate a person to be trifled with?

\"Serve him whom you are already serving. The mind becomes soiled by
serving but one master. And to serve five masters!

\"Once a woman became attached to a Mussalman and invited him to her
room. But he was a righteous person; he said to her that he wanted to
use the toilet and must go home to get his water-jar for water. The
woman offered him her own, but he said: \'No, that will not do. I shall
use the jar to which I have already exposed myself. I cannot expose
myself before a new one.\' With these words he went away. That brought
the woman to her senses. She understood that a new water-jar, in her
case, signified a paramour.\"

Narendra was in straitened circumstances on account of his father\'s
unexpected death. He had been seeking a job to maintain his mother,
brothers, and sisters. He had served a few days as headmaster of the
Vidyasagar School at Bowbazar.

ADHAR: \"May I ask if Narendra would accept a job?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, he would. He has his mother, brothers, and sisters to
support.\"

ADHAR: \"Well, Narendra can support his family with fifty or with a
hundred rupees. Will he try for a hundred?\"

MASTER: \"Worldly people think highly of their wealth. They feel that
there is nothing like it. Sambhu said, \'It is my desire to leave all my
property at the Lotus Feet of God.\' But does God care for money? He
wants from His devotees knowledge, devotion, discrimination, and
renunciation.

\"After the theft of the jewelry from the temple of Radhakanta, Mathur
Babu said: \'O God, You could not protect Your own jewelry! What a
shame!\' Once he wanted to give me an estate and consulted Hriday about
it. I overheard the whole thing from the Kāli temple and said to him:
\'Please don\'t harbour any such thought. It will injure me greatly.\'
\"

ADHAR: \"I can tell you truthfully, sir, that not more than six or seven
persons like you have been born since the creation of the world.\"

MASTER: \"How so? There certainly are people who have given up
everything for God. As soon as a man gives up his wealth, people come to
know about him. But it is also true that there are others unknown to
people. Are there not such holy men in upper India?\"

ADHAR: \"I know of at least one such person in Calcutta. He is
Devendranath Tagore.\"

MASTER: \"What did you say? Who has enjoyed the world as much as he?
Once I visited him at his house with

Mathur Babu. I saw that he had many young children. The family physician
was there writing out prescriptions.

If, after having eight children, a man doesn\'t think of God, then who
will? If, after, enjoying so much wealth, Devendranath hadn\'t thought
of God, then people would have cried shame upon him.\"

NIRANJAN: \"But he paid off all his father\'s debts.\"

MASTER: \"Keep quiet! Don\'t torment me any more. Do you call anyone a
man who doesn\'t payoff his father\'s debts if he is able to?

But I admit that Devendranath is infinitely greater than other worldly
men, who are sunk in their worldliness.

They can learn much from him.

**Signs of a real devotee**

There is an ocean of difference between a real all-renouncing devotee of
God and a householder devotee. A real sannyāsi, a real devotee who has
renounced the world, is like a bee. The bee will not light on anything
but a flower. It will not drink anything but honey.

But a devotee leading the worldly life is like a fly. The fly sits on a
festering sore as well as on a sweetmeat. One moment he enjoys a
spiritual mood, and the next moment he is beside himself with the
pleasure of \'woman and gold\'.

\"A devotee who has really and truly renounced all for God is like the
chatak bird. It will drink only the rain-water that falls when the star
Svati is in the ascendant. It will rather die of thirst than touch any
other water, though all around there may lie seven oceans and rivers
full to the brim with water. An all-renouncing devotee will not touch
\'woman and gold\'. He will not keep \'woman and gold\' near him lest he
should feel attached.\"

ADHAR: \"But Chaitanya, too, enjoyed the world.\"

MASTER (amazed): \"What? What did he enjoy in the world?\"

ADHAR: \"Scholarship! Honour!\"

MASTER: \"It was honour in the sight of others, but nothing to him.
Whether you―a deputy magistrate―or this

youngster Niranjan honours me, it is all the same to me. And I tell you
this truthfully: the idea of controlling a wealthy man never enters my
mind. Surendra once said, rather condescendingly, that Rākhāl \'s father
could sue me for letting Rākhāl stay with me. When I heard this from
Manomohan, I said: \'Who is this Surendra? How does he dare make a
remark like that? He keeps a carpet and pillow here and gives me some
money. Is that his excuse for daring to make such an impudent remark?\'
\"

ADHAR: \"I understand that he gives ten rupees a month. Isn\'t that
so?\"

MASTER: \"That covers two months expenses. The devotees stay here and he
gives the money for their service. It is he who earns the merit. What is
that to me? Is it for my personal gain that I love Narendra, Rākhāl ,
and the others?\"

M: \"Your love for them is like a mother\'s for her children.\"

**Master\'s genuine love for his disciples**

MASTER: \"But even behind the mother\'s love lies her hope that the
children will support her later on. But I love these youngsters because
I see in them Narayana Himself. These are not mere words.

**God takes charge of His devotees**

(To Adhar) \"Listen. There is no scarcity of moths when the lamp is
lighted. When God is realized, He Himself

provides everything for His devotees. He sees that they do not lack
anything. When God is enshrined in the heart, many people come forward
to offer their services.

\"Once a young sannyasi went to a householder to beg his food. He had
lived as a monk from his very birth; he knew nothing of worldly matters.
A young daughter of the householder came out to give him alms; He turned
to her mother and said, \'Mother, has this girl abscesses on her
chest?\' The mother said: \'No, my child. God has given her breasts to
nurse her child when she becomes a mother.\' Thereupon the sannyasi
said: \'Then why should I worry about myself? Why should I beg my food?
He who has created me will certainly feed me.\'

\"Listen. If a woman renounces everything for her paramour, she can say
to him, if need be, \'You wretch! I shall sit on your chest and devour
you.\'

\"Nangta told me of a certain king who gave a feast to the sādhus, using
plates and tumblers of gold. I noticed in the monasteries at Benares
with what great respect the abbots were treated. Many wealthy up-country
people stood before them with folded hands, ready to obey their
commands. But a true sādhu, a man who has really renounced everything,
seeks neither a gold plate nor honour.

God sees that he lacks nothing. God gives the devotee everything that is
needed for realizing Him.

(To Adhar) \"You are an executive officer. What shall I say to you? Do
whatever you think best. I am an illiterate person.\"

ADHAR (smiling, to the devotees): \"Now he is examining me.\"

MASTER (smiling) : \"Dispassion alone is good. Don\'t you see, I didn\'t
sign the receipt for my salary? God alone is real and all else is
illusory.\"

Hazra entered the room and sat with the devotees on the floor. Hazra
repeated now and then, \"Soham! Soham!\" \"I am He! I am He!\"

To Lātu and other devotees he often said: \"What does one gain by
worshipping God with offerings? That is merely giving Him things that
are His already.\" He had said this once to Narendra.

The Master spoke to him.

MASTER: \"I explained to Lātu who the object of the devotee\'s worship
is.\"

HAZRA: \"The devotee really prays to his own Self.\"

MASTER: \"What you say is a very lofty thought. The aim of spiritual
discipline, of chanting God\'s name and glories, is to realize just
that. A man attains everything when he discovers his true Self in
himself. The object of sādhanā is to realize that. That also is the
purpose of assuming a human body. One needs the clay mould as long as
the gold image has not been cast; but when the image is made, the mould
is thrown away. The body may be given up after the realization of God.

\"God is not only inside us; He is both inside and outside. The Divine
Mother showed me in the Kāli temple that everything is Chinmaya, the
Embodiment of Spirit; that it is She who has become all this―the image,
myself, the utensils of worship, the door-sill, the marble floor.
Everything is indeed Chinmaya.

\"The aim of prayer, of spiritual discipline, of chanting the name and
glories of God, is to realize just that. For that alone a devotee loves
God. These youngsters are on a lower level; they haven\'t yet reached a
high spiritual state. They are following the path of bhakti. Please
don\'t tell them such things as \'I am He\'.\"

Like the mother bird brooding over her chicks, Sri Ramakrishna was alert
to protect his devotees.

Adhar and Niranjan went out on the porch to take refreshments. Presently
they returned to the room.

ADHAR (smiling): \"We talked about so many things. (Pointing to M.) But
he didn\'t utter a word.\"

MASTER: \"In Keshab\'s organization there was a young man with four
university degrees. He laughed when he saw people arguing with me. He
said: \'To argue with him! How silly!\' I saw him again, later on, at
one of Keshab\'s meetings. But then he did not have the same bright
complexion.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sat on the floor for his supper. It was a light meal of
a little farina pudding and one or two luchis that had been offered in
the Kāli temple. M. and Lātu were in the room. The devotees had brought
various sweets for the Master. He touched a sandesh and asked Lātu,
\"Who is the rascal that brought this?\" He took it out of the cup and
left it on the ground. He said to Lātu and M.: \"I know all about him.
He is immoral\"

LĀTU: \"Shall I give you this sweet?\"

MASTER: \"Kishori brought it.\"

LĀTU: \"Will it suit you?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes.\"

M. had received an English education. Sri Ramakrishna said to him: \"It
is not possible for me to eat things offered by anyone and everyone. Do
you believe this?\"

1.  \"Gradually I shall have to believe all these things.\" MASTER:
    \"Yes, that is so.\"

After finishing the meal Sri Ramakrishna washed his mouth. He said to
M., \"Then will you give the rupee to Naran?\" \"Yes,\" said M.,

\"certainly I will.\"

The moon rose in the clear autumn sky and was reflected in the river. It
was ebb-tide in the Ganges and the river flowed south toward the sea.

**Sunday, September 14, 1884**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room with Narendra, Bhavanath, the
Mukherji brothers, and other devotees. Rākhāl was staying with Balarām
at Vrindāvan and was laid up with an attack of fever. Narendra was
preparing himself for his coming law examination.

About eleven o\'clock Jnan Babu arrived. He was a government official
and had received four university degrees.

MASTER (at the sight of Jnan Babu): \"Well! Well! This sudden awakening
of \'knowledge\'!\"

JNAN (smiling): \"You must admit, sir, that one sees the awakening of
knowledge as a result of very good fortune.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"You are Jnan. Then why should you have ajnan,

ignorance? Oh, I understand. Where there is knowledge there is also
ignorance. The sage Vasishtha was endowed with great knowledge and still
he wept at the death of his sons. Therefore I ask you to go beyond both
knowledge and ignorance. The thorn of ignorance has pierced the sole of
a man\'s foot. He needs the

thorn of knowledge to take it out. Afterwards he throws away both
thorns. The Jnāni says, \'This world is a \"framework of illusion\".\'
But he who is beyond both knowledge and ignorance describes it as a
\'mansion of mirth\'. He sees that it is God Himself who has become the
universe, all living beings, and the twenty-four cosmic principles.

**Living in the world after realization of God**

\"A man can live in the world after attaining God. Then he can lead the
life of detachment. In the country I have seen the women of the
carpenter families making flattened rice with a husking-machine. With
one hand one of them turns the paddy in the hole and with the other she
holds a nursing child. At the same time she talks with the buyer. She
says to him: \'You owe me two *ānnās*. Pay it before you go.\' But
seventy-five per cent of the woman\'s mind is on her hand lest it should
be crushed by the pestle of the husking machine.

\"A man should do his worldly duties with only twenty-five percent of
his mind, devoting the rest to God.\"

Referring to Pundit Shashadhar, the Master said to the devotees, \"I
found him monotonous―engaged in the dry discussion of philosophy.

\"He alone who, after reaching the Nitya, the Absolute, can dwell in the
Lila, the Relative, and again climb from the Lila to the Nitya, has ripe
knowledge and devotion. Sages like Nārada cherished love of God after
attaining the Knowledge of Brahman. This is called vijnāna.

\"Mere dry knowledge is like an ordinary rocket: it bursts into a few
sparks and then dies out. But the Knowledge of sages like Nārada and
Sukadeva is like a good rocket: for a while it showers balls of
different colours, and then it stops; again it throws out new balls, and
again it stops; and thus it goes on. Those sages had prema for God.
Prema is the rope by which one can reach Satchidananda.\"

The Master finished his midday meal and rested a few minutes. Bhavanath,
M., the Mukherji brothers, Hazra, and several other devotees sat down
under the bakul-tree and began to converse. The Master stopped there
awhile on his way to the pine-grove.

HAZRA (to the younger Gopal): \"Please prepare a smoke for him \[meaning
the Master\].\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Why don\'t you admit that you want it?\" (All
laugh.)

MUKHERJI (to Hazra): \"You must have learnt much wisdom from him
\[meaning the Master\].\"

MASTER (smiling): \"No, he has been wise like this from his boyhood.\"
(All laugh.)

Presently Sri Ramakrishna returned from the pine-grove. The devotees
noticed that he was in an ecstatic mood and was reeling like a drunkard.
After reaching his room he regained the normal state.

Many devotees gathered in the room. Among them was a new-comer, a
sadhaka from Konnagar, who looked over fifty years of age and seemed to
have great vanity of scholarship.

The Master stood in the middle of the room and suddenly said to M., \"He
came here―Naran.\"

Narendra was engaged in a discussion with Hazra and a few others on the
verandah. They could be heard from the room.

MASTER (referring to Narendra): \"The chatterbox! But he is now much
worried about his family.\"

M.: \"Yes, sir, it is true.\"

MASTER: \"Once he said that he would look upon adversity as his good
fortune. Isn\'t that so?\"

M: \"He has great strength of mind.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Does he lack strength in anything?\"

Pointing to the sadhaka from Konnagar, a devotee said to the Master:
\"Sir, he has come to visit you. He has some questions to ask.\"

The sadhaka was seated erect, his chin up.

SADHAKA: \"Sir, what is the way?\"

MASTER: \"Faith in the guru\'s words. One attains God by following the
guru\'s instructions step by step. It is like reaching an object by
following the trail of a thread.\"

SADHAKA: \"Is it possible to see God?\"

MASTER: \"He is unknowable by the mind engrossed in worldliness. One
cannot attain God if one has even a trace of attachment to \'woman and
gold\'. But He is knowable by the pure mind and the pure
intelligence―the mind and intelligence that have not the slightest trace
of attachment. Pure Mind, Pure Intelligence, Pure Ātman, are one and the
same thing.\"

SADHAKA: \"But the scriptures say, \'From Him words and mind return
baffled.\' He is unknowable by mind and words.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, stop! One cannot understand the meaning of the scriptures
without practising spiritual discipline. What will you gain by merely
uttering the word \'siddhi\'? The pundits glibly quote the scriptures;
but what will that accomplish? A man does not become intoxicated even by
rubbing siddhi on his body; he must swallow it. What is the use of
merely repeating, \'There is butter in the milk\'?

Turn the milk into curd and churn it. Only then will you get butter.\"

SADHAKA: \"You talk about churning butter. But you too are quoting the
scriptures.\"

MASTER: \"What will one gain by merely quoting or hearing the
scriptures? One must assimilate them. The almanac makes a forecast of
the rainfall for the year, but you won\'t get a drop by squeezing its
pages.\"

SADHAKA: \"You talk about churning butter. Have you done it yourself?\"

MASTER: \"You don\'t have to bother about what I have or haven\'t done.
Besides, it is very difficult to explain these things to others.

Suppose someone asks you, \'What does ghee taste like?\' Your answer
will be, \'Ghee tastes like ghee.\'

\"To understand these things one needs to live with holy men, just as to
understand the pulse of bile, of phlegm, and so on, one needs to live
with a physician.\"

SADHAKA: \"There are some people who are irritated by others\'
company.\"

MASTER: \"That happens only after the attainment of Knowledge, after the
realization of God. Shouldn\'t a beginner live in the company of holy
men?\"

The sadhaka sat in silence a few moments. Then he said with some
irritation: \"Please tell me whether you have realized God either
directly or intuitively. You may answer me if you are able, or you may
keep silent if you wish.\" The Master said with a smile: \"What shall I
say? One can only give a hint.\"

SADHAKA: \"Then tell us that much.\"

Narendra was going to sing. He said, \"No one has brought a pakhoaj.\"

THE YOUNGER GOPAL: \"Mahimacharan has one.\"

MASTER (interrupting): \"No, we don\'t want anything of his here.\"

A devotee from Konnagar sang a song. Every now and then Sri Ramakrishna
glanced at the sadhaka. The singer and Narendra became engaged in a
furious discussion about musical technique. The sadhaka said to the
singer, \"What is the use of such discussions?\" Referring to another
man who had joined in the discussion, Sri Ramakrishna said to the
sadhaka, \"Why didn\'t you scold him, too?\" It could be seen that the
sadhaka was not on friendly terms with his companions from Konnagar.

Narendra sang:

*O Lord, must all my days pass by so utterly in vain?*

*Down the path of hope I gaze with longing, day and night. . . .*

The sadhaka closed his eyes in meditation as he listened to the song. It
was four o\'clock in the afternoon. The rays of the setting sun fell on
his body. Sri Ramakrishna quickly opened an umbrella and placed it near
the door so that the sun might not disturb the sadhaka.

Narendra sang again:

> *How shall I call on Thee, O Lord, with such a stained and worldly
> mind?*
>
> *Can a straw remain unharmed, cast in a pit of Raming coals?*
>
> *Thou, all goodness, art the fire, and I, all sin, am but a straw:*
>
> *How shall I ever worship Thee?*
>
> *The glory of Thy name, they say, redeems those even past redeeming;*
>
> *Yet, when I chant Thy sacred name, alas! my poor heart quakes with
> fright.*
>
> *I spend my life a slave to sin; how can I find a refuge, then,*
>
> *O Lord, within Thy holy way?*
>
> *In Thine abounding kindliness, rescue Thou this sinful wretch;*
>
> *Drag me off by the hair of my head and give me shelter at Thy feet.*

Again he sang:

> *Sweet is Thy name, O Refuge of the humble!*
>
> *It falls like sweetest nectar on our ears*
>
> *And comforts us, Beloved of our souls!*
>
> *The priceless treasure of Thy name alone*
>
> *Is the abode of Immortality,*
>
> *And he who chants Thy name becomes immortal.*
>
> *Falling upon our ears, Thy holy name*
>
> *Instantly slays the anguish of our hearts,*
>
> *Thou Soul of our souls, and fills our hearts with bliss!*

As Narendra sang the line, \"And he who chants Thy name becomes
immortal\", the Master went into samādhi. At first his fingers,
especially the thumbs, began to tremble. The devotees from Kannagar had
never seen the Master in samādhi. Seeing him silent, they were about to
leave the room. Bhavanath said to them: \"Why are you going away? This
is his samādhi.\" The devotees resumed their places.

Narendra sang:

> *I have laboured day and night*
>
> *To make Thy seat within my heart;*
>
> *Wilt Thou not be kind to me,*
>
> *O Lord of the World, and enter there?*

Sri Ramakrishna, still in the ecstatic mood, came dawn from his couch to
the floar and sat by Narendra. The beloved disciple sang again:

> *In Wisdom\'s firmament the moon of Love is rising full,*
>
> *And Love\'s flood-tide, in surging waves, is flowing everywhere.*
>
> *O Lord, how full of bliss Thou art! Victory unto Thee! . . .*

As Narendra sang the last line, Sri Ramakrishna stood up, still absorbed
in samādhi.

**Futility of mere study of scriptures**

After a long time the Master regained partial consciousness of the world
and sat down on the mat. Narendra finished his singing, and the Tānpura
was put back in its place. The Master was still in a spiritual mood and
said: \"Mother, tell me what this is. They want someone to extract the
butter for them and hold it to their mouths. They won\'t throw the
spiced bait into the lake. They won\'t even hold the fishing-rod.
Someone must catch the fish and put it into their hands! How
troublesome! Mother, I won\'t listen to any more argument.

The rogues force it on me. What a bother! I shall shake it off. God is
beyond the Vedas and their injunctions. Can one realize Him by studying
the scriptures, the Vedas, and the Vedānta? (To Narendra) Do you
understand this? The Vedas give only a hint\"

Narendra wanted the Tānpura again. The Master said, \"I want to sing.\"
He was still in an ecstatic mood and sang:

> *Mother, this is the grief that sorely grieves my heart,*
>
> *That even with Thee for Mother, and though I am wide awake,*
>
> *There should be robbery in my house. . .*

The Master said, \"Mother, why do You make me argue?\" He sang again:

> *Once for all, this time, I have thoroughly understood;*
>
> *From One who knows it well, I have learnt the secret of bhava. . . .*

The Master said, \"I am quite conscious.\" But he was still groggy with
divine fervour. He sang once more:

> *I drink no ordinary wine, but Wine of Everlasting Bliss,*
>
> *As I repeat my Mother Kāli\'s name;*
>
> *It so intoxicates my mind that people take me to be drunk! . . .*

**Futility of reasoning**

Sri Ramakrishna had said, \"Mother, I won\'t listen to any more
argument.\"

Narendra sang:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason? . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna said with a smile: \"O Mother, make me mad! God cannot
be realized through knowledge and reasoning, through the arguments in
the scriptures.\" He had been pleased with the singing of the musician
from Konnagar and said to him humbly: \"Please sing about the Divine
Mother. Please - one song.\"

MUSICIAN: \"You must excuse me, sir.\"

MASTER (bowing with folded hands): \"No, sir. I can enforce this
demand.\"

Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna sang a few lines from a kirtan, assuming
the attitude of a gopi:

> *Radha has every right to say it;*
>
> *She has kept awake for Krishna.*
>
> *She has stayed awake all night,*
>
> *And she has every right to be piqued.*

Then he said to the musician: \"My dear sir, you are a child of the
Divine Mother. She dwells in all beings. Therefore I have every right

to enforce my demand. A farmer said to his guru, \'I shall get my mantra
from you by beating you, if I have to.\' \"

MUSICIAN (smiling): \"By a shoe-beating?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"No! I won\'t go that far.\"

Again in an abstracted mood Sri Ramakrishna said: \"The beginner, the
struggling, the perfect, and the supremely perfect. Which are
you―perfect or supremely perfect? Come along! Sing for us.\"

The musician complied. He sang just a melody.

MASTER: \"My dear sir, that too makes me happy.\"

The musician then sang a song. When the music was over, the devotees
from Konnagar saluted the Master and took their leave.

The sadhaka bowed before him with folded hands and said, \"Holy man, let
me say good-bye.\"

Sri Ramakrishna, still in an ecstatic mood, was talking to the Divine
Mother.

MASTER: \"Mother, is it You or I? Do I do anything? No. no! It is You.

Was it You who heard the arguments all this time, or was it I? No, not
I. It was You.\".

Sri Ramakrishna became conscious of the outer world and began to
converse with Narendra, Bhavanath, and the other devotees.

They were talking about the sadhaka.

BHAVANATH (smiling): \"What kind of man is he?\"

MASTER: \"He is a tamasic devotee.\"

BHAVANATH: \"He can certainly recite Sanskrit verses.\"

MASTER: \"Once I said to a man about a sādhu: \'He is a rajasic sādhu.
Why should one give him food and

other presents?\' At this another sādhu taught me a lesson by saying to
me: \'Don\'t say that. There are three

classes of holy men: sattvic, rajasic, and tamasic.\' Since that day I
have respected holy men of all classes.\"

NARENDRA (smiling): \"What? Is it like the \'elephant God\'? All,
indeed, are God.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"It is God Himself who sports in the world as both
vidyā and avidyā. Therefore I salute both. It is written in the Chandi:
\'The Divine Mother is the good fortune of the blessed and the ill
fortune of the unlucky.\' (To Bhavanath) Is that mentioned in the Vishnu
Purana?\"

BHAVANATH (smiling): \"I don\'t know, sir. The devotees from Konnagar
did not understand your samādhi and were about to leave the room.\"

MASTER: \"Who was it that asked them to remain?\"

BHAVANATH (smiling): \"It was I.\"

MASTER: \"My child, you are equally good in bringing people here and in
driving them away.\"

The conversation turned to the argument that Narendra had had with the
musician from Konnagar.

MUKHERJI: \"Narendra didn\'t spare him.\"

MASTER: \"That\'s right. One needs such grit. This is called the
influence of tamas on sattva. Must a man listen to everything another
man says? Should one say to a prostitute, \'All right, you may do
whatever you like\'? Must one listen to her? At one time Radha was
piqued. A friend said, \'Her ego has been roused.\' Brinde, another
friend, said: \'Whose is this\' ego? Her ego belongs to Krishna alone.
She is proud in the pride of Krishna.\' \"

**Glory of God\'s name**

The conversation turned to the glory of God\'s name.

BHAVANATH: \"I feel such relief while chanting the name of Hari.\"

MASTER: \"He who relieves us of sin is Hari. He relieves us of our three
afflictions in the world. Chaitanya preached the glory of Hari\'s name;
so it must be good. You see, he was such a great scholar, and an
Incarnation too. Since he preached that name, it must be good. (Smiling)
Once some peasants were invited to a feast. They were asked if they
would eat a preparation of hog plum. They answered: \'You may give it to
us if the gentlemen have eaten it. If they enjoyed it, then it must be
good.\' (All laugh.)

(To the Mukherji brothers) \"I should like to visit Shivanath; I won\'t
have to hire a carriage if you take me in yours.\"

MUKHERJI: \"All right, sir, we shall set a day.\"

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Do you think the Brahmos will like me? They
criticize those who believe in God with form.\"

Mahendra Mukherji wanted to go on a pilgrimage. He told Sri Ramakrishna
so.

MASTER (smiling): \"How is that? Do you want to go when the sprout of
divine love has hardly corne up? First comes the sprout, then the tree,
then the fruit. We are so happy to have you here to talk to.\"

MAHENDRA: \"I feel like visiting the holy places a little. I shall
return soon.\"

It was about five o\'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna left his
room. The devotees were walking in the garden. Many of them were about
to leave.

The Master was conversing with Hazra on the north verandah. They were
talking of Narendra\'s frequent visits to Annada, the eldest son of the
Guhas.

HAZRA: \"I hear that Annada is now practising austerity. He lives on
very little food and eats rice once every four days.\"

MASTER: \"Is that so? \'Who knows? One may realize God even by means of
a religious garb.\'\"

*Āgamani*?\"

HAZRA: \"Narendra sang the *Āgamani*.\"

MASTER (eagerly) : \"How did he sing it?\"

Kishori stood close by. The Master said to him, \"Are you well?\"

A little later the Master was standing on the west porch. Since it was
autumn, he had put on a flannel shirt dyed with ochre. He asked
Narendra, \"Is it true that you sang the

Accompanied by Narendra and M., Sri Ramakrishna walked to the embankment
of the Ganges.

Narendra sang the *Āgamani*:

> *Tell me, my Uma, how have you fared, alone in the Stranger\'s house?*
>
> *People speak so much ill of us! Alas, I die of shame!*
>
> *My Son-in- law smears His body with ashes from the funeral pyre And
> roams about in great delight;*
>
> *You too, along with Him, cover with ash your golden skin.*
>
> *He begs the food that He eats! How can I bear it, being your mother?*
>
> *This time, when He returns to claim you, I shall say to Him,*
>
> *\"My daughter Umā is not at home.\"*

Sri Ramakrishna stood listening to the song and went into samādhi. The
sun was still above the horizon as the Master stood on the embankment in
the ecstatic mood. On one side of him was the Ganges, flowing north with
the flood-tide. Behind him was the flower garden. To his right one could
see the nahabat and the Panchavati. Narendra stood by his side and sang.
Gradually the darkness of evening fell upon the earth.

After Narendra and several other devotees had saluted the Master and
left for Calcutta, Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room. He was absorbed
in meditation on the Divine Mother and was chanting Her holy name.

**Master at Jadu\'s garden**

Jadu Mallick had arrived at his garden house next to the Kāli temple. He
sent for the Master. Adhar, too, had arrived from Calcutta, and he
saluted Sri Ramakrishna. The Master asked Lātu to light the lantern and
accompany him to Jadu\'s garden.

MASTER (to M.): \"Why didn\'t you bring Naran with you?\"

M: \"Shall I come with you?\"

MASTER: \"Do you want to come? Adhar and the others are here. All right,
you may come. Will the Mukherjis also come with us? (To the Mukherjis)
Come along. Then we can leave Jadu-Mallick quickly.\"

The Master went to Jadu\'s drawing-room. It was a well furnished room,
with everything spick and span. The lamps were lighted. Jadu was sitting
with his friends and was playing with the children. Servants were in
attendance. Smiling, Jadu welcomed Sri Ramakrishna, but he did not get
up. He treated the Master as a friend of long acquaintance.

Jadu was a devotee of Gaurānga. He had just seen a performance of
Gaurānga\'s life at the Star Theatre and told the Master about it. The
Master listened to his account joyfully and played with the children. M.
and the Mukherji brothers sat near him. In the course of the
conversation Sri Ramakrishna told Jadu that Adhar had not been able to
secure the post of vice-chairman of the Calcutta Municipality. Jadu said
that Adhar was still young and could try for it again. At his request
the Master sang a few songs about Gaurānga.

After the music was over, the Mukherjis were about to take their leave.
The Master, too, was ready to go, but

he was in an ecstatic mood. On coming to the porch he went into samādhi.
The gate-keeper of the garden house was a pious man. Now and then he
invited the Master to his house and fed him. Sri Ramakrishna stood there
in samādhi and the gate-keeper fanned him with a large fan. Ratan, the
manager of the garden house, saluted the Master, and Sri Ramakrishna,
returning to the consciousness of the relative world, greeted the
manager and the gate-keeper, saying, \"Narayana\". Then, accompanied by
the devotees, he went back to the temple- garden through the main gate.

MASTER (to the Mukherjis, pointing to M.): \"Please visit him often.\"

MUKHERJI (smiling): \"Yes, henceforth he will be our teacher.\"

MASTER: \"It is the nature of the hemp-smoker to make merry in the
company of another hemp-smoker. He will not talk even to an amir, but he
will embrace a wretched hemp-smoker if he happens to meet one.\" (All
laugh.)

It was about nine o\'clock. The Mukherji brothers saluted the Master and
went away. Adhar and M. sat on the floor in the Master\'s room while he
talked to Adhar about Rākhāl .

**His worry over Rākhāl \'s illness**

Rākhāl was staying in Vrindāvan with Balarām. The Master had learnt from
a letter about Rākhāl \'s illness. He was so worried about him that two
or three days earlier he had wept before Hazra like a child. Adhar had
sent a registered letter to Rākhāl but had received no reply.

MASTER (to Adhar): \"Naran has received a letter from Vrindāvan. Why
haven\'t you received a reply to yours?\"

ADHAR: \"I haven\'t yet heard from Vrindāvan.\"

MASTER: \"M. has also received a letter from Vrindāvan.\"

They began to talk of Sri Ramakrishna\'s seeing a play, at the Star
Theatre, about the life of Cauranga.

MASTER (smiling): \"Jadu told me that one could see the play very well
from a one-rupee seat. Very cheap! Once we were talking about going to
Panihati. Jadu wanted me to go in a country boat with a whole crowd of
passengers. (All laugh.)

\"Formerly he liked to hear a little about God. But I don\'t see Jadu
much nowadays. He is always surrounded by flatterers. They have spoiled
him. He is a man of a very calculating nature. I would no sooner set
foot in his house than he would ask me,. \'How much is the carriage
hire?\' I would say: \'You don\'t have to bother about it. You may give
two and a half rupees.\' That would keep him quiet.\" (All laugh.)

It was late. Adhar was about to depart. The Master asked M. to bring
Naran with him.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 28**

AT THE STAR THEATRE

> Friday, September 19, 1884

IT WAS MAHALAYA, a sacred day of the Hindus, and the day of the new
moon. At two o\'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in
his room with Mahendra Mukherji, Priya Mukherji, M., Baburam, Harish,
Kishori, and Lātu. Some were sitting on the floor, some standing, and
others moving about. Hazra was sitting on the porch. Rākhāl was still at
Vrindāvan with Balarām.

**Master praises Captain\'s devotion**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"I was at Captain\'s house in Calcutta. It
was very late when I returned. What a sweet nature Captain has! What
devotion! He performs the *Ārati* before the image. First he waves a
lamp with three lights, then a lamp with one light, and last of all he
waves burning camphor. When performing the worship he does not speak.
Once he motioned to me to take my seat. During the worship his eyes
become swollen from spiritual emotion. They look as if they have been
stung by wasps. He cannot sing, but he chants hymns beautifully. In his
mother\'s presence he sits on a lower level; she sits on a high stool.

\"His father was a havildar in the English army. He would hold a gun
with one hand and with the other worship Śiva. His servant made a clay
image of Śiva for him. He wouldn\'t even touch water before performing
the worship. He earned six thousand rupees a year.

\"Captain sends his mother to Benares now and then. Twelve or thirteen
servants attend her there; it is very expensive. Captain knows the
Vedānta, the Gitā, and the Bhagavata by heart. He says that the educated
gentlemen of Calcutta follow the ways of the mlechchhas.

\"In his earlier years he practised hathayoga. That is why he strokes my
head gently when I am in samādhi. His wife worships the Deity in another
form-that of Gopala. This time I didn\'t find her so miserly. She too
knows the Gitā and other scriptures. What devotion they have!

\"They cooked a goat curry. Captain said they could eat it for fifteen
days, but she said, \'No, no! Only seven days.\' But I liked the taste
of it. They serve a very small quantity of each dish, but nowadays they
give me good portions since I eat more than they do. After the meal
either Captain or his wife fans me.

\"They are very pious souls and show great respect to holy men. The
people of upper India are greatly devoted to sādhus. The sons and
nephews of the Jung Bahadur of Nepal once visited the temple garden;
before me they showed great respect and humility. Once a young girl of
Nepal came to see me with Captain. She was a great devotee, and
unmarried; she knew the whole of the Gitagovinda by heart. Dwarika Babu
and the others wanted to hear her music. When she sang the Gitagovinda,
Dwarika Babu was profoundly moved and wiped the tears from his eyes with
his handkerchief. She was asked why she was not married. She said: \'I
am the handmaid of God. Whom else shall I serve?\' Her people respect
her as a goddess, as the scriptures enjoin.

(To Mahendra Mukherji and the others) \"I shall feel very happy to know
that you are being benefited by your visits here. (To M.) Why do people
come here? I don\'t know much of reading and writing.\"

M.: \"God\'s power is in you. That is why there is such power of
attraction. It is the Divine Spirit that attracts.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, this is the attraction of Yogamaya, the Divine Śakti. She
casts the spell. God performs all His lila through the help of Yogamaya.

**Nature of gopis\' love for Krishna**

\"The love of the gopis was like the attachment of a woman to her
paramour. They were intoxicated with

ecstatic love for Sri Krishna. A woman cherishing illicit love is not
very keen about her own husband. If she is told that her husband has
come, she will say: \'What if he has? There is food in the kitchen. He
can help himself.\' But if she is told of the arrival of a
stranger-jovial, handsome, and witty-she will run to see him and peep at
him from behind a screen.

\"You may raise an objection and say: \'We have not seen God. How can we
feel attracted to Him as the gopis felt attracted to Krishna?\' But it
is possible. \'I do not know Him. I have only heard His name, and that
has fixed my mind upon Him.\' \"

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, what is the significance of Sri Krishna\'s stealing
the gopis\' clothes?\"

MASTER: \"There are eight fetters that bind a person to the world. The
gopis were free from all but one: shame. Therefore Krishna freed them
from that one, too, by taking away their clothes. On attaining God one
gets rid of all fetters. (To Mahendra Mukherji and the others) By no
means all people feel attracted to God. There are special souls who feel
so. To love God one must be born with good tendencies. Otherwise, why
should you alone of all the people of Baghbazar come here? You can\'t
expect anything good in a dunghill. The touch of the Malaya breeze turns
all trees into sandal-wood, no doubt. But there are a few exceptions-the
banyan, the cotton-tree, and the Aśwattha, for example.

(To the Mukherji brothers) \"You are well off. If a man slips from the
path of yoga, then he is reborn in a prosperous family and starts again
his spiritual practice for the realization of God.\"

**Unfulfilled desires make one deviate from yoga** MAHENDRA: \"Why does
one slip from the path of yoga?\"

MASTER: \"While thinking of God the aspirant may feel a craving for
material enjoyment. It is this craving that makes him slip from the
path. In his next life he will be born with the spiritual tendencies
that he failed to translate into action in his present life.\"

MAHENDRA: \"Then what is the way?\"

MASTER: \"No salvation is possible for a man as long as he has desire,
as long as he hankers for worldly things.

Therefore fulfil all your desires regarding food, clothes, and sex.
(Smiling) What do you say about the last one?

Legitimate or illegitimate? (M. and Mahendra laugh.)

\"It is not good to cherish desires and hankerings. For that reason I
used to fulfil whatever desires came to my mind. Once I saw some
coloured sweetmeats at Burrabazar and wanted to eat them. They brought
me the sweets and I ate a great many. The result was that I fell ill.

\"In my boyhood days, while bathing in the Ganges, I saw a boy with a
gold ornament around his waist. During my state of divine intoxication I
felt a desire to have a similar ornament myself. I was given one, but I
couldn\'t keep it on very long. When I put it on, I felt within my body
the painful uprush of a current of air. It was because I had touched
gold to my skin. I wore the ornament a few moments and then had to put
it aside. Otherwise I should have had to tear it off.

\"I once felt a desire to eat the famous sweetmeats of different cities.
(All laugh.) I had a desire to hear Sambhu\'s musical recital of the
Chandi. After fulfilling that desire I wanted to hear the same thing by
Rajnarayan. That desire also was satisfied.

\"At that time many holy men used to visit the temple garden. A desire
arose in my mind that there should be

1.  separate store-room to supply them with their provisions. Mathur
    Babu arranged for one. The sādhus were given food-stuffs, fuel, and
    the like from that store-room.

\"Once the idea came to me to put on a very expensive robe embroidered
with gold and to smoke a silver

hubble-bubble. Mathur Babu sent me the new robe and the hubble-bubble. I
put on the robe. I also smoked the hubble-bubble in various fashions.
Sometimes I smoked it reclining this way, and sometimes that way,
sometimes with head up, and sometimes with head down. Then I said to
myself, \'O mind, this is what they call smoking a silver
hubble-bubble.\' Immediately I renounced it. I kept the robe on my body
a few minutes longer and then took it off. I began to trample it
underfoot and spit on it, saying: \'So this is an expensive robe! But it
only increases man\'s rajas.\'\"

**About Rākhāl**

Rākhāl had been staying at Vrindāvan with Balarām. At first he had
written excited letters praising the holy place. He had written to M.:
\"It is the best of all places. Please come here. The peacocks dance
around, and one always hears and sees religious music and dancing. There
is an unending flow of divine bliss.\" But then Rākhāl had been laid up
with an attack of fever. Sri Ramakrishna was very much worried about him
and vowed to worship the Divine Mother for his recovery. So he began to
talk about Rākhāl .

MASTER: \"Rākhāl had his first religious ecstasy while sitting here
massaging my feet. A Bhagavata scholar had been expounding the sacred
book in the room. As Rākhāl listened to his words, he shuddered every
now and then. Then he became altogether still.

\"His second ecstasy was at Balarām Bose\'s house. In that state he
could not keep himself sitting upright; he lay flat on the floor. Rākhāl
belongs to the realm of the Personal God. He leaves the place if one
talks about the Impersonal.

\"I have taken a vow to worship the Divine Mother when he recovers. You
see, he has renounced his home and relatives and completely surrendered
himself to me. It was I who sent him to his wife now and then. He still
had a little desire for enjoyment.

(Pointing to M,) \"Rākhāl has written him from Vrindāvan that it is a
grand place-the peacocks dance around.

Now let the peacock\'s take care of him. He has really put me in a fix.

**Balarām\'s devotion**

\"Rākhāl has been staying with Balarām at Vrindāvan. Ah, what a nice
nature Balarām has! It is only for my sake that he doesn\'t go to
Orissa, where his family owns an estate. His brother stopped his monthly
allowance and wrote to him: \'Come and stay with us here. Why should you
waste so much money in Calcutta?\' But he didn\'t listen. He has been
living in Calcutta because he wants to see me.

What devotion to God! He is busy day and night with his worship. His
gardener is always making garlands of flowers for the Deity, He has
decided to spend four months a year at Vrindāvan to reduce his expenses.
He gets a monthly allowance of two hundred rupees.

\"Why am I so fond of the youngsters? They are still untouched by
\'woman arid gold\'. I find that they belong to the class of the
nityasiddhas, the everperfect.\"

**Narendra\'s first visit**

\"When Narendra first came here he was dressed in dirty clothes; but his
eyes and face betokened some inner stuff. At that time he did not know
many songs. He sang one or two: \'Let us go back once more, O mind, to
our own abode!\' and \'O Lord, must all my days pass by so utterly in
vain?\'

\"Whenever he came here, I would talk only with him, though the room was
filled with people. He would say to me, \'Please talk to them\', and
then I would talk with the others.

\"I became mad for the sight of him and wept for him in Jadu Mallick\'s
garden house: \'I wept here, too, holding Bholanath\'s hand.\' Bholanath
said, \'Sir, you shouldn\'t behave that way for a mere kayastha boy.\'
One day the \'fat brahmin\' said to me about Narendra, with folded
hands, \'Sir, he has very little education; why should you

be so restless for him?\'

\"Bhavanath and Narendra are a pair. They are like man and woman. So I
asked Bhavanath to rent a house near Narendra\'s. Both of them belong to
the realm of the formless Reality.

**Master warns the devotees about women**

\"I forbid the youngsters to spend a long time with women or visit them
too frequently. Haripada has fallen into the clutches of a woman of the
Ghoshpara sect. She shows maternal feeling for him; but Haripada is a
child and doesn\'t understand its real meaning. The women of that sect
act that way when they see young boys. I understand that Haripada lies
on her lap and that she feeds him with her own hands. I shall tell him
that this is not good. This very maternal feeling leads to a downfall.
The women of that sect practise spiritual discipline in the company of
men; they regard men as Krishna. A teacher of that sect asks a woman
devotee, \'Have you found your Krishna?\' and she says, \'Yes, I have
found my Krishna.\'

\"The other day that woman came here. I watched the way she looked
around and I didn\'t approve of it. I said to her, \'You may treat
Haripada any way you like, but don\'t have any wrong feeling for him.\'

\"The youngsters are now in the stage of sadhana. They are aspirants.
For them the only thing now is renunciation. A sannyasi must not look
even at the portrait of a woman. I say to them: \'Don\'t sit beside a
woman and talk to her, even if she is a devotee. You may say a word or
two to her, standing.\' Even a perfect soul must follow this precept for
his own protection and also to set an example to others. When women,
come to me, I too say to them after a few minutes, \'Go and visit the
temples.\' If they don\'t get up, I myself leave the room. Others will
learn from my example.

**Master\'s attraction for people**

\"Can you tell me why all these youngsters, and you people, too, visit
me? There must be something in me; or why should you all feel such a
pull, such attraction?

**His own reminiscences**

\"Once I visited Hriday\'s house at Sihore. From there I was taken to
Syambazar. I had a vision of Cauranga before I entered the village, and
I realized that I should meet Cauranga\'s devotees there. For seven days
and nights I was surrounded by a huge crowd of people. Such attraction!
Nothing but kirtan and dancing day and night. People stood in rows on
the walls and even were in the trees.

\"I stayed at Natavar Goswami\'s house. It was crowded day and night. In
the morning I would run away to the house of a weaver for a little rest.
There too I found that people would gather after a few minutes. They
carried drums and cymbals with them, and the drum constantly
played:\'Takuti! Takuti!\' We would have our meal at three in the
afternoon.

\"The rumour spread everywhere that a man had arrived who died seven
times and came back to life again. Hriday would drag me away from the
crowd to a paddy-field for fear I might have an attack of heat apoplexy.
The crowd would follow us there like a line of ants. Again the cymbals
and the never-ending Takuti! Takuti!\' of the drums. Hriday scolded them
and said: \'Why do you bother us

like this? Have we never heard kirtan?\'

\"The Vaishnava priests of the village came and almost started a
quarrel. They thought I would take their share of the fees from the
devotees. But soon they discovered that I didn\'t touch a piece of cloth
or even a thread. Someone remarked that I was a Brahmajnani. So the
Vaishnava pundits wanted to test me. One said, \'Why hasn\'t he beads,
and a mark on his forehead?\' Another of them replied, They have dropped
from him, as the dry branch from a coconut tree. It was there that I
learnt this illustration of the dry branch of a coconut tree. The
upadhis, limitations, drop when one attains Knowledge.

\"People came thronging from distant villages. They even spent the night
there. At Syambazar I learnt the meaning of divine attraction. When God
incarnates Himself on earth He attracts people through the help of
Yogamaya, His Divine Power. People become spellbound.\"

It was about three o\'clock in the afternoon. The Master had been
conversing with the Mukherji brothers and the other devotees, when
Radhika Goswami, a Vaishnava scholar, arrived and bowed before him. This
was his first visit to the Master. Radhika Goswami took a seat.

MASTER: \"Are you a descendant of Advaita?\"

GOSWAMI: \"Yes, sir.\"

At this the Master saluted him with folded hands.

MASTER: \"You are descended from Advaita Goswami. You must have
inherited some of his traits. A sweet-mango tree produces only sweet
mangoes arid not sour ones. Of course, it happens that some trees
produce large mangoes and some small; that depends on the soil. Isn\'t
that true?\"

GOSWAMI (humbly): \"Sir, what do I know?\"

MASTER: \"Whatever you may say, others will not let you off so easily.
Brahmans, however imperfect they-may be, are worshipped by all on
account of their having been born in the lines of great sages. (To M.)
Tell us the story of the samkhachila.\"

M. sat in silence.

MASTER: \"If one of your ancestors was a great soul, he will certainly
pull you up, however unworthy you may be. When King Duryodhana and his
brothers were taken captive by the gandharvas, Yudhisthira released them
in spite of the fact that King Duryodhana was his enemy and had banished
him to the forest.

\"Besides, one must show respect to the religious garb. Even the mere
garb recalls to mind the real object.

Chaitanya once dressed an ass in a religious garb and then prostrated
himself before it.

\"Why do people bow before a samkhachila? When Kamsa was about to kill
the Divine Mother, She Hew away taking the form of a samkhachila. So
even now people salute the bird.

\"An Englishman arrived at the cantonment of Chanak. The sepoys saluted
him. Koar Singh explained to me:

\'India is under the rule of the English. Therefore one should salute an
Englishman.

\"The Saktas follow the Tantra, and the Vaishnavas the Purana. There is
no harm for the Vaishnavas in speaking publicly of their spiritual
practices. But the Saktas maintain secrecy about theirs. For this reason
it is difficult to understand a Sakta.

(To Goswami) \"You are all good people. How much japa you practise! How
much you chant the name of Hari!\"

GOSWAMI (humbly): \"Oh, no! We do very little. I am a great sinner.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"You have humility. That is good. But there is also
another way: \'I chant the name of Hari. How can I be a sinner?\' He who
constantly repeats: \'I am a sinner! I am a wretch!\' verily becomes a
sinner. What lack of faith! A man chants the name of God so much, and
still he talks of sin!\"

Radhika Goswami listened to these words in amazement.

**Master\'s following of different paths**

MASTER: \"At Vrindāvan I myself put on the garb of the Vaishnavas and
wore it for fifteen days. (To the

devotees) I have practised the disciplines of all the paths, each for a
few days. Otherwise I should have found no peace of mind. (Smiling) I
have practised all the disciplines; I accept all paths. I respect the
Saktas, the Vaishnavas, and also the Vedantists. Therefore people of all
sects come here. And everyone of them thinks that I belong to his
school. I also respect the modern Brahmajnanis.

\"A man had a tub of dye. Such was its wonderful property that people
could dye their clothes any colour they wanted by merely dipping them in
it. A clever man said to the owner of the tub, \'Dye my cloth the colour
of your dye-stuff.\' (All laugh.)

\"Why should I be one-sided? The idea that the people of a particular
sect will not come to me does not frighten me. I don\'t care a bit
whether people come to me or not. The thought of keeping anyone under my
control never crosses my mind. Adhar Sen asked me to ask the Divine
Mother for a big position for him, but he didn\'t get it. If that makes
him think differently about me, what do I care?

\"Once at Keshab\'s house I found myself in a new mood. The Brahmos
always speak of the Impersonal; therefore I said to the Divine Mother in
an ecstatic mood: \'Mother, please don\'t come here. They don\'t believe
in Your forms.\'\"

Radhika Goswami listened to these words of the Master against
sectarianism and remained silent.

**Master\'s praise of Vijay Goswami**

ASTER (smiling): \"Vijay is in a wonderful state of mind nowadays. He
falls to the ground while chanting the name of Hari. He devotes himself
to kirtan, meditation, and other spiritual practices till four in the
morning. He now puts on an ochre robe and prostrates himself before the
images of God. Once he accompanied me to Gadadhar\'s schoolhouse. I
pointed out the place where Gadadhar

used to meditate. At once Vijay prostrated himself there. Again he fell
prostrate before the picture of Chaitanyadeva.\"

GOSWAMI: \"What about the image of Radha-Krishna?\"

MASTER: \"He prostrated himself there too. Vijay also follows all the
conventions of religious life.\"

GOSWAMI: \"He can now be accepted in Vaishnava society.\"

MASTER: \"People\'s opinions don\'t count for much with him.\"

GOSWAMI: \"I don\'t mean that. By accepting him Vaishnava society will
honour itself.\"

MASTER: \"He respects me very much. But it is difficult to reach him.
One day he is called to Dāccā, the next day to some other place. He is
always busy. His presence has created great trouble in the Sadharan
Brahmo Samaj.\"

GOSWAMI: \"Why so, sir?\"

MASTER: The Brahmos tell him: \'You mix with people who worship God with
form. You are an idolater.\' Vijay is liberal and straightforward.
Unless a man is guileless, he doesn\'t receive the grace of God. Sri
Ramakrishna talked to the Mukherji brothers. Mahendra, the elder, had
his own business. Priyanath, the younger, had been an engineer. After
making some provision for himself, he had given up his job. Mahendra was
thirty-five or thirty-six years old. The brothers had homes both in the
country and in Calcutta.

MASTER (smiling): \"Don\'t sit idle simply because your spiritual
consciousness has been awakened a little. Go forward. Beyond the forest
of sandalwood there are other and more valuable things-silver-mines,
gold-mines, and so on.\"

**Bondage and freedom are of the mind**

PRIYA (smiling): \"Sir, our legs are in chains. We cannot go forward.\"

MASTER: \"What if the legs are chained? The important thing is the mind.
Bondage is of the mind, and freedom also is of the mind.

\"Listen to a story. There were two friends. One went into a house of
prostitution and the other to hear a recital of the Bhagavata. \'What a
shame!\' thought the first. \'My friend is hearing spiritual discourse,
but just see what I have slipped down to!\' The second friend said to
himself: \'Shame on me! My friend is having a good time, but how stupid
I am!\' After death the soul of the first was taken to Vaikuntha

by the messenger of Vishnu, while that of the second was taken to the
nether world of Yama.\"

PRIYA: \"But the mind is not under my control.\"

MASTER: \"How is that? There is such a thing as abhyiisayoga, yoga
through practice. Keep up the practice and you will find that your mind
will follow in whatever direction you lead it. The mind is like a white
cloth just returned from the laundry. It will be red if you dip it in
red dye and blue if you dip it in blue. It will have whatever colour you
dip it in.

(To Goswami) \"Have you anything to ask?\"

GOSWAMI: \"No, sir. I am satisfied that I have seen you and have been I
listening to your words.\"

MASTER: \"Go and visit the temples.\"

GOSWAMI (very humbly): \"Won\'t you please sing something about Sri
Chaitanya?\"

The Master complied. He sang:

> *Why has My body turned so golden?It is not time for this to be:*
>
> *Many the ages that must pass, before as Gaurānga I appear! . .*

Again:

> *Gora gazes at Vrindāvan and tears stream from his eyes;*
>
> *In an exuberance of joy, he laughs and weeps and dances and sings. He
> takes a wood for Vrind āvan, the ocean for the blue Jamuna; He rolls
> on the ground for love of Hari.*

After singing, the Master went on with the conversation.

MASTER (to Goswami): \"I have sung these songs to suit your Vaishnava
temperament. But I must sing differently when the Saktas or others come.

\"Herepeople of all sects come-Vaishnavas, Saktas,
Kartabhajas,Vedantists, and also members of the modern Brahmo Samaj.
Therefore one finds here all ideals and attitudes. It is by the will of
God that different religions and opinions have come into existence. God
gives to different people what they can digest. The mother does not give
fish pilau to all her children. All cannot digest it; so she prepares
simple fish soup for some. Everyone cherishes his own special ideal and
follows his own nature.

\"They provide various images for the Baroari because people of
different sects assemble at it. You see there images of Radha-Krishna,
Śiva-Durga, and Sita-Rāma-different images in different places. A crowd
gathers before each image. The Vaishnavas spend most of their time
before the image of Radha-Krishna, the Saktas before Śiva-Durga, and the
devotees of Rāma before Sita-Rāma.

\"But it is quite different with those who are not spiritually minded at
all. In the Baroari one sees another image also-a prostitute beating her
paramour with a broomstick. Those people stand there with gaping mouths
and cry to their friends: \'What are you looking at over there? Come
here! Look at this!\' \" (All laugh.)

Radhika Goswami saluted the Master and took his leave.

It was about five o\'clock. The Master was on the semicircular west
porch. Baburam, Lātu, the Mukherji brothers, M., and some other devotees
were with him.

MASTER (to M. and the others): \"Why should I be one-sided? The goswamis
belong to the Vaishnava school and are very bigoted. They think that
their opinion alone is right and all other opinions are wrong. My words
have hit him hard. (Smiling) One must strike the elephant on the head
with the goad; that is the elephant\'s most sensitive spot.\"

> Then Sri Ramakrishna told a few naughty jokes for the young men.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"I don\'t give the youngsters a pure
vegetarian diet: now and then I give them a little water smelling of
fish. Otherwise, why should they come?\"

The Mukherji brothers left the porch. They went to the garden for a
stroll.

MASTER (to M.): \"I wonder whether the Mukherjis have taken offence at
my jokes?\"

M: \"Why should they? Captain said that you are like a child. After
realizing God a man becomes childlike.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, and sometimes he behaves like a boy, and sometimes like a
young man. As a boy he is very light-hearted. He may use frivolous
language. As a young man he is like a roaring lion while teaching
others. You had better explain my state of mind to the Mukherjis.\"

M: \"I don\'t have to do that. Haven\'t they the sense to see it?\"

Again the Master became light-hearted with the boys. Then he said to one
of the devotees: \"Today is the new moon. Go to the Kāli temple in the
evening.\"

It was dusk. They heard the sound of gongs, cymbals, and other
instruments used in the evening service in. the temples. The Master said
to Baburam, \"Come with me to the Kāli temple.\" He and Baburam went
toward the temple, accompanied by M. At the sight of Harish sitting on
the porch, the Master said: \"What is this? Is he in ecstasy?\"

Going through the courtyard, the Master and the devotees stopped a
minute in front of the Radhakanta temple to watch the worship. Then they
proceeded to the shrine of Kāli. With folded hands the Master prayed to
the Divine Mother: \"O Mother! O Divine Mother! O Brahmamayi!\"

Reaching the raised platform in front of the shrine, he bowed low before
the image. The *Ārati* was going on.

He entered the shrine and fanned the image.

The evening worship was over. The devotees bowed before the Deity. It
was the night of the new moon. The Master was in a spiritual mood.
Gradually his mood deepened into intense ecstasy. He returned to his
room, reeling like a drunkard and holding to Baburam\'s hand.

**Master\'s prayer to Divine Mother**

A lamp was lighted on the west porch. The Master sat there a few
minutes, chanting: \"Hari Om! Hari Om! Hari Om!\" and other mystic
syllables of the Tantra. Presently he returned to his room and sat on
the small couch, facing the east. He was still completely. absorbed in
divine fervour. He said to the Divine Mother: \"Mother, that I should
first speak and You then act-oh, that\'s nonsense! What is the meaning
of talk? It is nothing but a

sign. One man says, \'I shall eat.\' Again, another says, \'No! I won\'t
hear of it.\' Well, Mother, suppose I had said I would not eat;
wouldn\'t I still feel hungry? Is it ever possible that You should
listen only when one prays aloud and not when one feels an inner
longing? You are what You are. Then why do I speak? Why do I pray? I do
as You make me do. Oh, what confusion! Why do You make me reason?\"

As Sri Ramakrishna was thus talking to God, the devotees listened
wonder-struck to his words. The Master\'s eyes fell upon them.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"One must inherit good tendencies to realize
God, One must have done something, some form of tapasya, either in this
life or in another.

\"When Draupadi\'s clothes were being taken off, she cried earnestly,
praying to God. God revealed Himself to her and said: \'Try to remember
whether you have ever made a gift of a cloth to anyone. Then your
modesty will be preserved.\' Draupadi replied: \'Yes, I remember now.
Once a rishi was taking his bath when his loin-cloth was carried away by
the current. I tore off half my cloth and gave it to him.\' Thereupon
the Lord said, \'Then you have nothing to fear.\' \"

M. was sitting on the small foot-rug.

MASTER (to M.): \"You have understood what I said.\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. You spoke about inherent tendencies.\" MASTER: \"Repeat
    what I said.\"

M. repeated the story of Draupadi.

Hazra entered the room. He had been living with Sri Ramakrishna in the
temple garden for the past two years and had first met the Master in
1880 at Sihore in the house of Hriday, the Master\'s nephew. Hazra\'s
native village was near Sihore, and he owned some property there. He had
a wife and children and also some debts. From youth he had felt a spirit
of renunciation and sought the company of holy men and devotees. The
Master had asked him to live with him at Dakshineswar and looked after
his necessities. Hazra\'s mind was a jumble of undigested religious
moods. He professed the path of knowledge and disapproved of Sri
Ramakrishna\'s attitude of bhakti and his longing for the young
devotees. Now and then he thought of the Master as a great soul, but
again he slighted him as an ordinary human being. He spent much of his
time in telling his beads, and he criticized Rākhāl and the other young
men for their indifference to the practice. He was a strong advocate of
religious conventions and rules of conduct, and made a fad of them. He
was about thirty-eight years old.

As Hazra came in, the Master became a little abstracted and in that mood
began to talk.

MASTER (to Hazra): \"What you are doing is right in principle, but the
application is not quite correct. Don\'t find fault with anyone, not
even with an insect. As you pray to God for devotion, so also pray that
you may not find fault with anyone.\"

HAZRA: \"Does God listen to our prayer for bhakti?\"

MASTER: \"Surely. I can assure you of that a hundred times. But the
prayer must be genuine and earnest. Do worldly-minded people weep for
God as they do for wife and children? At Kamarpukur the wife of a
certain man fell ill. The man thought she would not recover; he began to
tremble and was about to faint. Who feels that way for God?\"

Hazra was about to take the dust of the Master\'s feet.

MASTER (shrinking): \"What is this?\"

HAZRA: \"Why should I not take the dust of his feet who has so kindly
kept me with him?\"

MASTER: \"Satisfy God and everyone will be satisfied. \'If He is pleased
the world is pleased.\' Once the Lord ate a few greens from Draupadi\'s
cooking-pot and said, \'Ah, I am satisfied.\' Immediately the whole
world and all its living beings were satisfied; they felt as if they had
eaten their fill. But was the world satisfied or did it feel that way
when the rishis ate their food?

(To Hazra) \"A perfect soul, even after attaining Knowledge, practises
devotions or observes religious ceremonies to set an example to others.
I go to the Kāli temple and I bow before the holy pictures in my room;
therefore others do the same. Further, if a man has become habituated to
such ceremonies, he feels restless if he does not observe them.

\"One day I saw a sannyasi under the banyan-tree. He had put the
salagram on the same carpet with his guru\'s sandals. He was worshipping
them. I said to him, \'If you have attained Knowledge to that extent,
then why such formal worship at all?\' He replied: \'What difference
does it make? Since I do everything else, why not this too? Sometimes I
offer the flowers at the guru\'s feet and sometimes to God.\'

\"One cannot renounce work as long as one has a body. As long as there
is mud at the bottom of the lake, bubbles will be produced.

**Advice to Hazra - Scriptures and sadhana**

(To Hazra) \"If there is knowledge of one, there is also knowledge of
many. What will you achieve by mere study of the scriptures? The
scriptures contain a mixture of sand and sugar, as it were. It is
extremely difficult to separate the sugar from the sand. Therefore one
should learn the essence of the scriptures from the teacher or from a
sādhu. Afterwards what does one care for books?

(To the devotees) \"Gather all the information and then plunge in.
Suppose a pot has dropped in a certain part of a lake. Locate the spot
and dive there.

\"One should learn the essence of the scriptures from the guru and then
practise sadhana. If one rightly follows spiritual discipline, then one
directly sees God. The discipline is said to be rightly followed only
when one plunges in. What will a man gain by merely reasoning about the
words of the scriptures? Ah, the fools! They reason themselves to death
over information about the path. They never take the plunge. What a
pity!

\"You may say, even though you dive deep you are still in danger of
sharks and crocodiles, of lust and anger. But dive after rubbing your
body with turmeric powder; then sharks and crocodiles will not come near
you. The turmeric is discrimination and renunciation.

**Master\'s spiritual practice**

(To the devotees) \"God made me pass through the disciplines of various
paths. First according to the Purana, then according to the Tantra. I
also followed the disciplines of the Vedas. At first I practised sadhana
in the Panchavati. I made a grove of tulsi-plants and used to sit inside
it and meditate. Sometimes I cried with a longing Heart, \'Mother!
Mother!\' Or I again, \'Rāma! Rāma!\'

\"While repeating the name of Rāma, I sometimes assumed the attitude of
Hanuman and fixed a tail to the lower end of my backbone. I was in a
God-intoxicated state. At that time I used to put on a silk robe and
worship the Deity. What joy I experienced in that worship!

\"I practised the discipline of the Tantra under the bel-tree. At that
time I could see no distinction between the sacred tulsi and any other
plant. In that state I sometimes ate the leavings from a jackal\'s meal,
food that had been exposed the whole night, part of which might have
been eaten by snakes or other creatures. Yes, I ate that stuff.
\"Sometimes I rode on a dog and fed him with luchi, also eating part of
the bread myself. I realized that the whole world was filled with God
alone. One cannot have spiritual realization without destroying
ignorance; so I would assume the attitude of a tiger and devour
ignorance.

\"While practising the disciplines of the Vedas, I became a sannyasi. I
used to lie down in the chandni and say to Hriday: \'I am a sannyasi. I
shall take my meals here.\'

\"I vowed to the Divine Mother that I would kill myself if I did not see
God. I said to Her: \'O Mother, I am a fool. Please teach me what is
contained in the Vedas, the Puranas, the Tantras, and the other
scriptures.\' The Mother said to me, \'The essence of the Vedānta is
that Brahman alone is real and the world illusory.\'The Satchidananda
Brahman described in the Vedas is the Satchidananda Śiva of

the Tantra and the Satchidananda Krishna of the Purana. The essence of
the Gitā is what you get by repeating the word ten times. It is reversed
into \'tagi\', which indicates renunciation.

\"After the realization of God, how far below lie the Vedas, the
Vedānta, the Purana, the Tantra! (To Hazra) I cannot utter the word
\'Om\' in samādhi. Why is that? I cannot say \'Om\' unless I come down
very far from the state of samādhi.

\"I had all the experiences that one should have, according to the
scriptures, after one\'s direct perception of God. I behaved like a
child, like a madman, like a ghoul, and like an inert thing.

\"I saw the visions described in the scriptures. Sometimes I saw the
universe filled with sparks of fire. Sometimes I saw all the quarters
glittering with light, as if the world were a lake of mercury. Sometimes
I saw the world as if made of liquid silver. Sometimes, again, I saw all
the quarters illumined as if with the light of Raman candles. So you see
my experiences tally with those described in the scriptures.

\"It was revealed to me further that God Himself has become the universe
and all its living beings and the twenty-four cosmic principles. It is
like the process of evolution and involution.

\"Oh, what a state God kept me in at that time! One experience would
hardly be over before another overcame me. It was like the movement of
the husking-machine: no sooner is one end down than the other goes up.

\"I would see God in meditation, in the state of samādhi, and I would
see the same God when my mind came back to the outer world. When looking
at this side of the mirror I would see Him alone, and when looking on
the reverse side I saw the same God.\"

The devotees listened to these words with rapt attention.

(To the Mukherji brothers) \"Captain is now really in the state of the
sadhaka. That the mere possession of wealth should create, attachment is
by no means true. Sambhu Mallick used to say to Hriday, \'Hridu, I have
packed my things and am ready for the journey.\' I said to him: \'God
forbid! Why do you say such ominous words?\' \'No\', replied Sambhu.
\'Please bless me that I may cast aside all these possessions and go to
God.\'

\"God\'s devotees have nothing to fear. They are His own He always
stands by them. Once Duryodhana and his brothers were imprisoned by the
gandharvas. It was Yudhisthira who freed them. Yudhisthira said, \'If
our relatives are placed in such a plight, then it is our disgrace.\' \"

It was about nine o\'clock in the evening. The Mukherji brothers were
ready to return to Calcutta. The Master left his seat and began to pace
the room and the porch. He could hear the kirtan sung in the Vishnu
temple. A devotee said that Harish and Lātu were in the singing party.

Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees went to the Vishnu temple and saluted
the Deity. The brahmins belonging to the staff of the temple garden, and
also the priests, the cooks, and the servants, were singing the kirtan.
He stood there a few minutes and encouraged the singers. On the way back
to his room he remarked to the devotees, \"You see, some of them polish
the metal utensils and some go to houses of prostitution.\"

The Master returned to his room and took his seat. Presently the singers
came and bowed low before him. The

Master said to them: \"One should perspire, dancing and singing the name
of God, as people do earning money. I had thought of joining you in the
dancing; but I found that you did everything very well. You had
flavoured the curry with all the seasoning. What could I add? It will be
nice if you sing devotional songs that way now and then.\"

The Mukherji brothers saluted the Master. Their carriage was ready near
the verandah north of the room. The Master stood facing the north. On
his left was the Ganges; in front of him were the nahabat, the garden,
and the kuthi; and to his right was the road leading to the gate. The
night was dark, and a devotee had brought a lantern to show the visitors
their way. One by one the devotees bowed and took the dust of the
Master\'s feet. The carriage seemed too heavily loaded for the horses.
The Master said, \"Aren\'t there too many people in the carriage?\"

Sri Ramakrishna remained standing. As the carriage rolled away, the
devotees looked back at the Master\'s face beaming with compassion and
love.

**Sunday, September 21, 1884**

A large number of devotees were in Sri Ramakrishna\'s room, among them
Ram, Mahendra Mukherji, M., and Chunilal. Chunilal had just returned
from Vrindāvan, where he had gone with Rākhāl and Balarām. The two
latter were still there. Nityagopal also was staying there. The Master
began to talk with Chunilal about Vrindāvan.

MASTER: \"How is Rākhāl ?\"

CHUNI: \"He is quite well now, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Isn\'t Nityagopal coming back?\"

CHUNI: \"He was still there when I left.\"

MASTER: \"Who will bring your family back?\"

CHUNI: \"Balarām Babu told me he would arrange it with some reliable
person. He didn\'t mention any name.\"

**Master praises Narayan**

Sri Ramakrishna then spoke to Mahendra Mukherji about Narayan, a
school-boy sixteen or seventeen years old, who often visited the Master
and was very dear to him.

MASTER: \"He is quite guileless, isn\'t he?\"

The very uttering of the word \"guileless\" filled the Master with great
joy.

MAHENDRA: \"Yes, sir. Completely guileless.\"

MASTER: \"His mother came here the other day. I was a little frightened
to see that she was a proud woman. That day she found that Captain, you,
and many others, too, visited me. Then she must have realized that she
and her son were not the only people to come here. (All laugh.) There
was some sugar candy in the room and she remarked that it was good. That
made her feel there was no scarcity of food here. I happened to tell
Baburam, in front of her, to keep some sweets for himself and Naran.
Ganu\'s mother said that Naran always bothered his mother for the boat
hire to come here. His mother said to me, \'Please ask Naran to consent
to marry.\' I replied, \'All that depends on one\'s fate.\' Why should I
interfere? (All laugh.) Naran is indifferent to his studies. His mother
said, \'Please ask him to pay a little more attention.\' So I said to
Naran, \'Attend to your studies.\' Then his mother said, \'Please tell
him seriously.\' (All laugh.)

(To Chunilal) \"Why doesn\'t Gopal come here?\"

CHUNILAL: \"He has been suffering from dysentery.\"

MASTER: \"Is he taking any medicine?\"

Sri Ramakrishna was planning to go to a performance of the Chaitanyalila
at the Star Theatre. Mahendra Mukherji was to take him to Calcutta in
his carriage. They were talking about choosing good seats. Some
suggested that one could see the performance well from the one-rupee
gallery. Ram said, \"Oh, no! I shall engage a box for him.\" The Master
laughed. Some of the devotees said that public women took part in the
play. They took the parts of Nimai, Nitai, and others.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"I shall look upon them as the Blissful
Mother Herself. What if one of them acts the part of Chaitanya? An
imitation custard-apple reminds one of the real fruit. Once, while going
along a road, a devotee of Krishna noticed some babla-trees. Instantly
his mind was thrown into ecstasy. He remembered that the wood of
babla-trees was used for the handles of the spades that the garden of
the temple of Syamasundar was dug with. The trees instantly reminded him
of Krishna. I was once taken to the Maidan in Calcutta to see a balloon
go up. There I noticed a young English boy leaning against a tree, with
his body bent in three places. It at once brought before me the vision
of Krishna and I went into samādhi.

\"Once Chaitanyadeva was passing through a village. Someone told him
that the body of the drum used in the kirtan was made from the earth of
that village, and at once he went into ecstasy.

\"Radha could not control herself at the sight of a cloud or the blue
throat of a peacock. It would at once awaken in her mind the thought of
Krishna, and she would go into ecstasy.\"

The Master was silent a few moments and then resumed the conversation.

MASTER: \"Radha had attained mahabhava. There was no desire behind the
ecstatic love of the gopis. A true lover does not seek anything from
God. He prays only for pure love. He doesn\'t want any powers or
miracles.

**Occult powers**

\"It is very troublesome to possess occult powers. Nangta taught me this
by a story. A man who had acquired occult powers was sitting on the
seashore when a storm arose. It caused him great discomfort; so he said,
\'Let the storm stop.\' His words could not remain unfulfilled. At that
moment a ship was going full sail before the wind. When the storm ceased
abruptly the ship capsized and sank. The passengers perished and the sin
of causing their death fell to the man. And because of that sin he lost
his occult powers and went to hell.

\"Once upon a time a sādhu acquired great occult powers. He was vain
about them. But he was a good man and had some austerities to his
credit. One day the Lord, disguised as a holy man, came to him and said,
\'Revered sir, I have heard that you have great occult powers.\' The
sādhu received the Lord cordially and offered him a seat. Just then an
elephant passed by. The Lord, in the disguise of the holy man, said to
the sādhu, \'Revered sir, can you kill this elephant if you like?\' The
sādhu said, \'Yes, it is possible.\' So saying, he took a pinch of dust,
muttered some mantras over it, and threw it at the elephant. The beast
struggled awhile in pain and then dropped dead. The Lord said: \'What
power you have! You have killed the elephant!\' The sādhu laughed. Again
the Lord spoke: \'Now can you revive the elephant?\' \'That too is
possible\', replied the sādhu. He threw another pinch of charmed dust at
the beast. The elephant writhed about a litle and came back to life.
Then the Lord said: \'Wonderful is your power. But may I ask you one
thing? You have killed the elephant and you have revived it. But what
has that done for you? Do you feel uplifted by it? Has it enabled you to
realize God?\' Saying this the Lord vanished.

\"Subtle are the ways of dharma. One cannot realize God if one has even
the least trace of desire. A thread cannot pass through the eye of a
needle if it has the smallest fibre sticking out.

\"Krishna said to Arjuna, \'Friend, if you want to realize Me, you will
not succeed if you have even one of the eight occult powers.\' This is
the truth. Occult power is sure to beget pride, and pride makes one
forget God.

\"Once a cross-eyed rich man came here. He said to me: \'You are a
paramahamsa. That is good. You must perform a swastyayana ceremony for
me.\' What a small-minded person he was! He called me a paramahamsa and
yet wanted me to perform that ceremony. To secure welfare by means of
the swastyayana is to exercise occult power.

\"An egotistic person cannot realize God. Do you know what egotism is
like? It is like a high mound, where rain-water cannot collect: the
water runs off. Water collects in low land. There seeds sprout and grow
into trees. Then the trees bear fruit.

\"Therefore I say to Hazra, \'Never think that you alone have true
understanding and that others are fools.\' One must love all. No one is
a stranger. It is Hari alone who dwells in all beings. Nothing exists
without Him.

\"The Lord said to Prahlada, \'Ask a boon of Me.\' \'I have seen You\',
replied Prahlada. \'That is enough. I don\'t need anything else.\' But
the Lord insisted. Thereupon Prahlada said, \'If You must give me a
boon, let it be that those who have tortured me may not have to suffer
punishment.\' The meaning of those words is that it was God who tortured
Prahlada in the form of his persecutors, and, if they suffered
punishment, it would really be God who suffered.

**Divine madness**

\"Radha was mad with prema, ecstatic love of God. But there is also the
madness of bhakti. Hanuman\'s was such. When he saw Sita entering the
fire he was going to kill Rāma. Then, too, there is the madness of
Knowledge. I once saw a Jnāni behaving like a madman. He came here very
soon after the temple garden was dedicated. People said he belonged to
the Brahmo Sabha of Rammohan Roy. He had a torn shoe on one foot, a
stick in one hand, and a potted mango-plant in the other. After a dip in
the Ganges he went to the Kāli temple where Haladhāri was seated. With
great fervour he began to chant a hymn to the Divine Mother. Then he
went up to a dog, held it by the ear, and ate some of its food. The dog
didn\'t mind. Just at that time I too was about to experience the state
of divine madness. I threw my arm around Hriday\'s neck and said, \'Oh,
Hride! Shall I too fall into that plight?\'

**Master\'s God-intoxicated condition**

\"I became mad. Narayan Shastri came here and saw me roaming about with
a bamboo pole on my shoulder. He said to the people, \'Ah, he is mad!\'
In that state I could not observe any caste restrictions. The wife of a
low caste man used to send me cooked greens, and I ate them.

\"I touched my head and lips with the leaf-plates from which the beggars
ate their food in the guest-house of the Kāli temple. Thereupon
Haladhāri said to me: \'What have you done? You have taken the food left
by beggars. How will you marry off your children?\' These words aroused
my anger. Haladhāri was my cousin, older than myself. But could that
restrain me? I said to him: \'You wretch! Isn\'t it you who take pride
in the study of the Gitā and the Vedānta? Isn\'t it you who teach people
that Brahman alone is real and the world illusory? And yet you imagine
that I shall beget children! May your mouth that recites from the Gitā
be blighted!\'

(To M.) \"You see, mere study of books avails nothing. One may recite
the written part for the drum glibly from memory, but to play the drum
is exceedingly difficult.\"

The Master continued with the description of his divine madness:

\"Once, for a few days, I was out on an excursion with Mathur Babu in
his house-boat. We took the trip for a change of air. During that trip
we visited Navadvip. One day I saw the boatmen cooking their meal and
stood and watched them. Mathur said to me, \'What are you doing there?\'
I replied with a smile, \'The boatmen are cooking, and their food looks
very good.\' Mathur felt that I might ask the boatmen to give me a
portion of their food; so he said: \'Come away! Come away!\'

\"But I cannot do such a thing now. I am no longer in that mood. Now the
food must be cooked by a brahmin observing ceremonial purity, and be
offered to the Deity; then only can I eat it.

\"Oh, what moods I passed through! At Kamarpukur I said to Chine
Sankhari and the other chums of my boyhood days, \'Oh, I fall at your
feet and beg of you to utter the name of Hari.\' I was about to
prostrate myself before them all. Thereupon Chine said, \'This is the
first outburst of your divine love; so you don\'t see any distinction
between one man and another.\' When the storm breaks and raises the
dust, then mango and tamarind trees look the same. One cannot
distinguish the one from the other.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"How can a householder keep on with his worldly duties if he
is overwhelmed by such bhakti-madness or Love-madness or Knowledge
madness?\"

**Two kinds of yogis**

MASTER (looking at him): \"There are two kinds of yogis, the
\'revealed\' and the \'hidden\'. The householder may be a \'hidden\'
yogi. None recognizes him. The householder should renounce mentally, not
outwardly.\"

RAM: \"You talk as if you were consoling children. A householder may be
a Jnāni but never a vijnāni.\"

MASTER: \"He may become a vijnāni in the end. But it is not good to
force oneself into renunciation.\"

RAM: \"Keshab Sen used to say: \'Why do people go to him so much? One
day he will sting them and they will flee from him.\' \"

MASTER: \"Why should I sting people? I say to people: \'Do this as well
as that. Do your worldly duties and call on God as well.\' I don\'t ask
them to renounce everything. (With a smile) One day Keshab was
delivering a lecture. He said, \'O Lord, grant us that we may dive into
the river of divine love and go straight to the Ocean of
Satchidananda.\' The ladies were seated behind the screen. I said to

Keshab, \'How can you all dive once for all?\' Pointing to the ladies, I
said: \'Then what would happen to them? Every now and then you must
return to dry land. You must dive and rise alternately.\' Keshab and the
others laughed.

\"Hazra says to me, \'You love most those endowed with rajas, those who
have great wealth and name and fame.\' If that is so, then why do I love
people like Harish and Noto? Why do I love Narendra? He can\'t even
afford salt to season his roast banana!\"

Sri Ramakrishna left his from and went toward the pine-grove talking
with M. A devotee followed them with water and towel. The Master was
talking about his intended visit to the Star Theatre. He said to M.:
\"What Ram says applies to rajasic people. What is the use of reserving
an expensive seat?\"

About five o\'clock that afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was on his way to
Calcutta. M., Mahendra Mukherji, and a few other devotees accompanied
him in Mahendra\'s carriage. Thinking of God, the Master soon went into
an ecstatic mood. After a long time he regained consciousness of the
world. He observed: \"That fellow Hazra dares teach me! The rascal!\"
After a short pause he said, \"shall drink some water.\" He often made
such remarks in order to bring his mind down to the sense plane.

MAHENDRA (to M.): \"May I get some refreshments for him?\"

1.  \"No, he won\'t eat anything now.\" MASTER (still in ecstatic mood):
    \"I shall eat.\"

Mahendra took the Master to his flour-mill located at Hathibagan. After
a little rest Sri Ramakrishna was to go to the theatre. Mahendra did not
care to take him to his own house, for the Master was not well
acquainted

with his father. Priyanath, Mahendra\'s second brother, was also a
devotee of the Master.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on a cot over which a carpet had been
spread, and was engaged in spiritual talk.

MASTER (to M. and the others): \"Once, while listening to the various
incidents of the life of Chaitanya, Hazra said that these were
manifestations of Śakti, and that Brahman, the All-pervasive Spirit, had
nothing to do with them. But can there be Śakti without Brahman? Hazra
wants to nullify the teachings of this place.

**Identity of Brahman and Śakti**

\"I have realized that Brahman and Śakti are identical, like water and
its wetness, like fire and its power to burn. Brahman dwells in all
beings as the Bibhu, the All-pervasive Consciousness, though Its
manifestation is greater in some places than in others. Hazra says,
further, that anyone who realizes God must also acquire God\'s
supernatural powers; that he possesses these powers, though he may or
may not use them.\"

M: \"Yes, one must have control over these supernatural powers!\" (All
laugh)

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, one must have them in one\'s grasp! How mean!
He who has never enjoyed power and riches becomes impatient for them.
But a true devotee never prays to God for them.\"

Sri Ramakrishna washed his face. A smoke was prepared for him. He said
to M.: \"Is. it dusk now? If it is, I won\'t smoke. During the twilight
hour of the dusk you should give up all other activities and remember
God.\" Saying this he looked at the hairs on his arm. He wanted to see
whether he could count them. If he could not, it would be dusk.

**Master at Star Theatre**

About half past eight in the evening the carriage with the Master and
the devotees drew up in front of the Star Theatre on Beadon Street. He
was accompanied by M., Baburam, Mahendra and two or three others. They
were talking about engaging seats, when Girish Chandra Ghosh, the
manager of the theatre, accompanied by several officials, came out to
the carriage, greeted the Master, and took him and the party upstairs.
Girish had heard of the Master and was very glad to see him at the
theatre. The Master was conducted to one of the boxes. M. sat next to
him; Baburam and one or two devotees sat behind.

The hall was brilliantly lighted. The Master looked down at the pit and
saw that it was crowded. The boxes also were full. For every box there
was a man to fan those who occupied it. Sri Ramakrishna was filled with
joy and said to M., with his childlike smile: \"Ah, it is very nice
here! I am glad to have come. I feel inspired when I see so many people
together. Then I clearly perceive that God Himself has become
everything.\"

M: \"It is true, sir.\"

MASTER: \"How much will they charge us here?\"

1.  \"They won\'t take anything. They are very happy that you have come
    to the theatre.\" MASTER: \"It is all due to the grace of the Divine
    Mother.\"

The Chaitanyalila was about to be performed. It was a play about the
early life of Sri Chaitanya, who was also known as Nimai, Gaur, Gora,
and Gaurānga. The curtain rose; the attention of the audience was fixed
on the stage.

The first scene depicts a council of Sin and the Six Passions. On a
forest path behind them walk Viveka, Vairāgya, and Bhakti, engaged in
conversation.

Bhakti says to her companions: \"Gaurānga is born in Nadia. Therefore
the vidyadharis, the munis, and the rishis have come down to earth in
disguise to pay their respects to him.\"

She sings:

> *Blest indeed is the earth! Gora is born in Nadia!*
>
> *Behold the vidyadharis, coming in chariots toadore him;*
>
> *Behold the munis and rishis, who come, allured by the spell of Love.*
>
> *The vidyadharis, munis, and rishis sing a hymn to Gaurānga and adore
> him as an Incarnation of God.*

Sri Ramakrishna watched the scene and was overpowered with divine
ecstasy. He said to M.: \"Look at it! Ah! Ah!\"

> **Sages:** *O Kesava, bestow Thy grace*
>
> *Upon Thy luckless servants here!*
>
> *O Kesava, who dost delight*
>
> *To roam Vrindāvan\'s glades and groves!*
>
> **Goddesses:** *O Madhava, our mind\'s Bewitcher!*
>
> *Sweet One, who dost steal our hearts,*
>
> *Sweetly playing On Thy flute!*
>
> **Chorus:** *Chant, O mind, the name of Hari,*
>
> *Sing aloud the name of Hari,*
>
> *Praise Lord Hari\'s name!*
>
> **Sages:***O Thou Eternal Youth of Braja,*
>
> *Tamer of fierce Kaliya,*
>
> *Slayer of the afflicted\'s fear!*
>
> **Goddesses:** *Beloved with the arching eyes*
>
> *And crest with arching peacock feather,*
>
> *Charmer of Sri Radha\'s heart!*
>
> **Sages:***Govardhan\'s mighty Lifter, Thou,*
>
> *All garlanded with sylvan flowers!*
>
> *O Damodara, Kamsa\'s Scourge!*
>
> **Goddesses:***O Dark One, who dost sport in bliss*
>
> *With sweet Vrindāvan\'s gopi maids.*
>
> **Chorus:** *Chant, O mind, the name of Hari,*
>
> *Sing aloud the name of Hari,*
>
> *Praise Lord Hari\'s name!*

As the vidyadharis sang the lines, *Beloved with the arching eyes; And
crest with arching peacock feather!,* the

Master went into deep samādhi. The orchestra played on, but he was not
aware of the outer world.

Another scene: A guest has arrived at the house of Jagannath Misra,
Nimai\'s father. The boy Nimai plays about, singing with his friends, in
a happy mood:

> *Tell Me, where is My blessed Vrindāvan?*
>
> *Where is Mother Yaśoda?*
>
> *Where Father Nanda and Brother Balai?*
>
> *Where My twin cows, black and white?*
>
> *Tell Me, where is My magic flute?*
>
> *My friends Sudāmā and Sridāmā?*
>
> *Where My Jamuna\'s bank, My banyan?*
>
> *Where My beloved gopi maids?*
>
> *Where is Radha, queen of My heart?*

The guest closes his eyes while offering food to the Lord. Nimai runs to
him. and eats the food from the plate. The guest recognizes Nimai as an
Incarnation of God and seeks to please him with the Hymn of the Ten
Incarnations. Before taking leave of Gaurānga\'s parents he sings:

> *Glory to Gora, the Source of Bliss!*
>
> *Hail Gaurānga, Redeemer of earth!*
>
> *Help of the helpless, Life of the living,*
>
> *Slayer of fear in the hearts of the fearful!*
>
> *Age after age we see Thy play*
>
> *New sports unfolding, moods ever new;*
>
> *New waves rolling, new tales to be told.*
>
> *Thou who bearest the whole world\'s burden,*
>
> *Shower on us the nectar of Love!*
>
> *Take away our grief and affliction:*
>
> *Thou in Love\'s pleasure-cave dost dwell.*
>
> *Hope of the suffering! Chastiser of sin!*
>
> *Scourge of the wicked! Victory to Thee!*

Listening to the hymn, the Master was thrilled with ecstasy.

The next scene is at Navadvip on the bank of the Ganges. After bathing
in the holy water, the brahmin men and women engage in worship by the
riverside. As they close their eyes, Nimai steals their food offerings
and begins to eat them. A brahmin loses his temper and says: \"You
scapegrace! You rascal! You are taking away my offering for Vishnu. Ruin
will seize you.\" Nimai holds on to the offering and is about to run
away. Many of the women love him dearly and cannot bear to have him go
away. They call to him: \"Return, O Nimai! Come back, O Nimai!\" Nimai
turns a deaf ear to them.

One of the women, however, knows the irresistible charm that will bring
him back. She loudly chants the name of Hari. Immediately he repeats the
name of Hari and comes back.

M. was seated beside the Master. Sri Ramakrishna could not control
himself. He cried out, \"Ah!\" and shed tears of love. He said to
Baburam and M.: \"Don\'t make a fuss if I fall into an ecstatic mood or
go into samādhi. Then the worldly people will take me for a cheat.\"

Another scene: Nimai is invested with the sacred thread of the brahmins.
He puts on the traditional ochre robe of the sannyasi. Mother Sachi and
the women of the neighbourhood stand about while he begs for alms,
singing:

> *Drop a morsel of food, I pray, into my begging bowl;*
>
> *Alone I roam, a new-made yogi, on the highways of the world.*
>
> *People of Braja, you I love, and so, time and again,*
>
> *I come to you; at hunger\'s call I beg my food from door to door.*
>
> *The sun is low, and I must seek my home on the Jamuna\'s bank;*
>
> *Into its waters fall my tears, as onward murmuring it flows.*

The onlookers leave the stage. Nimai stands alone. The gods, in the
guise of brahmin men and women, sing his praises.

> **Men:** *Thy body gleams like liquid moonlight;*
>
> *Thou hast put on man\'s dwarfish form.*
>
> *O Lord, Thee we salute!*
>
> **Women:** *Bewitcher of the gopis\' hearts,*
>
> *Thou roamest in the shady groves*
>
> *About Vrindāvan\'s vale.*
>
> **Nimai:** *Hail Sri Radha! Glory to Radha!*
>
> *The youths of Braja are Thy friends;*
>
> *Thou curbest haughty Madan\'s pride.*
>
> **Women:** *Thy love has made the gopis mad;*
>
> *In ecstasy the Jamuna thrills.*
>
> **Men:** *Narayana, Deluder of demons!*
>
> *Refuge of the fear-stricken gods!*
>
> **Women:** *O Lover of Braja, Thou dost beg*
>
> *The love of Braja\'s comely maidens!*

**Nimai:** *Hail Sri Radha! Glory to Radha!*

Listening to the music, the Master went into samādhi. The curtain fell
and the orchestra played on.

A new scene: Srivas and other devotees are engaged in conversation in
front of Advaita\'s house. Mukunda sings:

> *Sleep no more! How long will you lie*
>
> *In māyā\'s slumber locked, O mind?*
>
> *Who are you? Why have you been born?*
>
> *Forgotten is your own true Self.*
>
> *O mind, unclose your eyes at last*
>
> *And wake yourself from evil dreams;*
>
> *A fool you are to bind yourself*
>
> *So to the passing shows of life,*
>
> *When in you lives Eternal Bliss.*
>
> *Come out of the gloom, O foolish mind!*
>
> *Come out and hail the rising Sun!*

Sri Ramakrishna praised the voice of the singer highly.

Another scene: Nimai is staying at home. Srivas comes to visit him.
First he meets Sachi. The mother weeps and says: \"My son doesn\'t
attend to his household duties. My eldest son, Viswarupa, has renounced
the world, and my heart has ached ever since. Now I fear that Nimai will
follow in his steps.\"

Nimai arrives. Sachi says to Srivas: \"Look at him. Tears run down his
cheeks and breast. Tell, tell me how I can free him from these
notions.\"

At the sight of Srivas, Nimai clings to his feet and says, with eyes
full of tears: \"Ah me! Revered sir, I have not yet attained devotion to
Krishna. Futile is this wretched life! Tell me, sir, where is Krishna?
Where shall I find Krishna? Give me the dust of your feet with your
blessing, that I may realize the Blue One with the garland of
wild-flowers hanging about His neck.\"

Sri Ramakrishna looked at M. He was eager to say something but he could
not. His voice was choked with

emotion; the tears ran down his cheeks; with unmoving eyes he watched
Nimai clinging to Srivas\'s feet and saying, \"Sir, I have not yet
attained devotion to Krishna.\"

Nimai has opened a school, but he cannot teach the students any longer.
Gangadas, his former teacher, comes to persuade him to direct his
attention to his worldly duties. He says to Srivas: \"Listen, Srivas! We
are brahmins, too, and devoted to the worship of Vishnu. But you people
are ruining Nimai\'s worldly prospects.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"That is the advice of the worldly-wise: Do \'this\' as
well as \'that\'. When the worldly man teaches spirituality he always
advises a compromise between the world and God.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. That is true.\"

Gangadas continues his argument with Nimai. He says: \"Nimai,
undoubtedly you are versed in the scriptures. Reason with me. Explain to
me if any other duty is superior to worldly duties. You are a
householder. Why disregard the duties of a householder and follow
others\' duties?\"

MASTER (to M.): \"Did you notice? He\'s trying to persuade Nimai to make
a compromise.\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

Nimai says to Gangadas: \"I am not wilfully indifferent to a
householder\'s duties. On the contrary, it is my desire to hold to all
sides. But, revered sir, I don\'t know what it is that draws me on. I
don\'t know what to do. I want to cling to the shore but I cannot. My
soul wanders away. I am helpless. My soul constantly wants to plunge
headlong into the boundless Ocean.\"

MASTER: \"Ah me!\"

The scene changes: Nityananda has arrived at Navadvip. After a search he
meets Nimai, who, in turn, has been seeking him. When they meet, Nimai
says to him: \"Blessed is my life! Fulfilled is my dream! You visited me
in a dream and then disappeared.\"

The Master said in a voice choked with emotion, \"Nimai said he had seen
him in a dream.\"

Nimai is in an ecstatic mood and becomes engaged in conversation with
Advaita, Srivas, Haridas, and other devotees. Nitai sings a song suited
to Nimai\'s mood:

> *Where is Krishna? Where is my Krishna?*
>
> *He is not in the grove, dear friends.*
>
> *Give me Krishna! Bring me my Krishna!*
>
> *Radha\'s heart knows naught but Him.*

At this song Sri Ramakrishna went into samādhi. He remained in that
state a long time. The orchestra played on. Gradually his mind came down
to the relative plane. In the mean time a young man of Khardaha, born in
the holy family of Nityananda, had entered the box. He was standing
behind the Master\'s chair. Sri Ramakrishna was filled with delight at
the sight of him. He held his hand and talked to him affectionately.
Every now and then he said: \"Please sit down here. Your very presence
awakens my spiritual feeling.\" He played tenderly with the young man\'s
hands and lovingly stroked his face.

After he had left, Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: \"He is a great scholar.
His father is a great devotee of God. When I go to Khardaha to visit
Syamasundar, the father entertains me with sacred offerings such as one
cannot buy even for a hundred rupees. This young man has good traits. A
little shaking will awaken his inner spirit. At the sight of him my
spiritual mood is aroused. I should have been overwhelmed with ecstasy
if he had stayed here a little longer.\"

The curtain rises: Nityananda is walking in a procession on the public
road with his companions, chanting the

name of Hari. He meets two ruffians, Jagai and Madhai, who are sworn
enemies of all religious people. Madhai strikes Nitai with a piece of
broken pottery. Nitai is hurt and bleeds profusely, but he pays no heed,
inebriated as he is with the love of God.

Sri Ramakrishna was in an ecstatic mood.

Nitai embraces both Jagai and Madhai, and sings a song to the two
ruffians:

> *Jagai! Madhai! Oh, come and dance,*
>
> *Chanting Hari\'s name with fervour!*
>
> *What does it matter that you struck me?*
>
> *Dance, dear friends, in Hari\'s name!*
>
> *Sing the name of our Beloved:*
>
> *He will embrace you in love\'s rapture!*
>
> *Let the heavens resound with His name!*
>
> *You have not tasted true emotion:*
>
> *Weep as you chant the name of Hari,*
>
> *And you will see the Moon of your soul.*
>
> *Hari\'s name would I lovingly give you;*
>
> *Nitai calls you to share His love.*

Nimai speaks to Sachi of his desire to enter the monastic life. His
mother faints and falls to the ground.

At this point many in the audience burst into tears. Sri Ramakrishna
remained still and looked intently at the stage. A single tear appeared
in the corner of each eye. The performance was over.

Sri Ramakrishna was about to enter a carriage. A devotee asked him how
he had enjoyed the play. The Master said with a smile, \"I found the
representation the same as the real.\"

The carriage proceeded toward Mahendra\'s mill. Suddenly, Sri
Ramakrishna went into an ecstatic mood and murmured to himself in loving
tones: \"O Krishna! O Krishna! Krishna is knowledge! Krishna is soul!
Krishna is mind! Krishna is life! Krishna is body!\" He continued: \"O
Govinda, Thou art my life! Thou art my soul!\"

The carriage reached the mill. Mahendra fed the Master tenderly with
various dishes. M. sat by his side.

Affectionately he said to M., \"Here, eat a little.\" He put some sweets
in his hands.

With Mahendra and a few other devotees, Sri Ramakrishna left in the
carriage for the Dakshineswar temple garden. The Master was in a happy
mood. He sang a song about Gaurānga and Nitai. M. sang with him:

> *Gaur and Nitai, ye blessed brothers!*
>
> *I have heard how kind you are,*
>
> *And therefore I have come to you. . .*

The Master and Mahendra talked about the latter\'s intended pilgrimage.

MASTER (smiling): \"The divine love in you is barely a sprout now. Why
should you let it wither? But come back very soon. Many a time I have
thought of visiting your place. At last I have done it. I am so happy.\"

MAHENDRA: \"My life is indeed blessed, sir.\"

MASTER: \"You were already blessed. Your father is also a good man. I
saw him the other day. He has faith in the Adhyātma Rāmāyana.\"

MAHENDRA: \"Please bless me that I may have love for God.\"

MASTER: \"You are generous and artless. One cannot realize God without
sincerity and simplicity. God is far, far away from the crooked heart.\"

Near Syambazar, Mahendra bade the Master good-bye, and the carriage
continued on its way.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 29**

THE DURGA PUJA FESTIVAL

> Friday, September 26, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA had come to Calcutta. It was the first day of the Durga
Puja, the great religious festival, and the Hindus of the metropolis
were celebrating it. The Master intended to visit the image of the
Divine Mother at Adhar\'s house. He also wanted to see Shivanath, the
Brahmo devotee.

It was about midday. Umbrella in hand, M. was pacing the foot-path in
front of the Brahmo Samaj temple. Two hours had passed but the Master
had not yet appeared. Now and then M. sat down on the steps of Dr.
Mahalnavish\'s dispensary and watched the joy and mirth of the people,
young and old, who were celebrating the Puja.

A little after three the Master\'s carriage drove up. As soon as Sri
Ramakrishna stepped out he saluted the temple of the Brahmo Samaj with
folded hands. Hazra and a few other devotees were with him. M. bowed
before the Master and took the dust of his feet. The Master told him
that he was going to Shivanath\'s house. A few minutes later several
members of the Brahmo Samaj came and took him to Shivanath\'s. But
Shivanath was not at home. Shortly afterwards Vijay Goswami,
Mahalnavish, and several other Brahmo leaders greeted the Master and
took him inside the Brahmo temple.

Sri Ramakrishna was in a happy mood. He was given a seat below the
altar. There the Brahmo devotees sang their devotional music. Vijay and
the Brahmo devotees sat in front of the Master.

MASTER (to Vijay, with a smile): \"I was told that you had put up a
\'signboard\' here that people belonging to other faiths are not allowed
to come in. Narendra, too, said to me: \'You shouldn\'t go to the Brahmo
Samiij. You had better visit Shivanath\'s house.\'

**Master\'s catholicity**

\"But I say that we are all calling on the same God. Jealousy and malice
need not be. Some say that God is formless,and some that God has form. I
say, let one man meditate on God with form if he believes in form, and
let another meditate on the formless Deity if he does not believe in
form. What I mean is that dogmatism is not good. It is not good to feel
that my religion alone is true and other religions are false. The
correct attitude is this: My religion is right, but I do not know
whether other religions are right or wrong, true or false. I say this
because one cannot know the true nature of God unless one realizes Him.
Kabir used to say: \'God with form is my Mother, the Formless is my
Father. Which shall I blame? Which shall I praise? The two pans of the
scales are equally heay.\'

**Different paths for different temperaments**

\"Hindus, Mussalmans, Christians, Saktas, Saivas, Vaishnavas, the
Brahmajnanis of the time of the rishis, and you, the Brahmajnanis of
modern times, all seek the same object. A mother prepares dishes to suit
the stomachs of her children. Suppose a mother has five children and a
fish is bought for the family. She doesn\'t cook pilau or kalia for all
of them. All have not the same power of digestion; so she prepares a
simple stew for some. But she loves all her children equally.

\"Do you know my attitude? I love all the preparations of fish. I have a
womanly nature (all laugh). I feel myself at home with every dish-fried
fish, fish cooked with turmeric powder, pickled fish. And further, I
equally relish rich preparations like fish-head, kalia, and pilau. (all
laugh)

\"Do you know what the truth is? God has made different religions to
suit different aspirants, times, and countries. All doctrines are only
so many paths; but a path is by no means God Himself. Indeed, one can
reach God if one follows any of the paths with whole-hearted devotion.
Suppose there are errors in the religion that

one has accepted; if one is sincere and earnest, then God Himself will
correct those errors. Suppose a man has set out with a sincere desire to
visit Jagannath at Puri and by mistake has gone north instead of south;
then certainly someone meeting him on the way will tell him: \'My good
fellow, don\'t go that way. Go to the south.\' And the man will reach
Jagannath sooner or later.

\"If there are errors in other religions, that is none of our business.
God, to whom the world belongs, takes care of that. Our duty is somehow
to visit Jagannath. (To the Brahmos) The view you hold is good indeed.
You describe God as formless. That is fine. One may eat a cake with
icing, either straight or sidewise. It will taste sweet either way.

**Dogmatism condemned**

\"But dogmatism is not good. You have no doubt heard the story of the
chameleon. A man entered a wood and saw a chameleon on a tree. He
reported to his friends, \'I have seen a red lizard.\' He was firmly
convinced that it was nothing but red. Another person, after visiting
the tree, said, \'I have seen a green lizard.\' He was firmly convinced
that it was nothing but green. But the man who lived under the tree
said: \'What both of you have said is true. But the fact is that the
creature is sometimes red, sometimes green, sometimes yellow, and
sometimes has no colour at all.\'

\"God has been described in the Vedas as both with attributes and
without. You describe Him as without form only. That is one-sided. But
never mind. If you know one of His aspects truly, you will be able to
know His other aspects too. God Himself will tell you all about them.
(Pointing to two or three Brahmo devotees) Those who come to your Samaj
know both this gentleman and that.\"

**Encouragement to Vijay**

Vijay still belonged to the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj. He was a salaried
preacher of that organization but could not obey all its rules and
regulations. He mixed with those who believed in God with form. This was
creating a misunderstanding between him and the Brahmo authorities. Many
Brahmos disapproved of his conduct. The Master suddenly looked at Vijay
and began to talk to him.

MASTER (to Vijay, smiling): \"I understand that they have been finding
fault with you for mixing with those who believe in God with form. Is
that true? He who is a devotee of God must have an understanding that
cannot be shaken under any conditions. He must be like the anvil in a
blacksmith\'s shop. It is constantly being struck by the hammer; still
it is unshaken. Bad people may abuse you very much and speak ill of you;
but you must bear with them all if you sincerely seek God. Isn\'t it
possible to think of God in the midst of the wicked? Just think of the
rishis of ancient times. They used to meditate on God in the forest,
surrounded on all sides by tigers, bears, and other ferocious beasts.
Wicked men have the nature of tigers and bears. They will pursue you to
do you an injury.

**How to deal with wicked people**

\"One must be careful about these few things. First, an influential man
who has much money and many men under his control. He can injure you if
he wants; you must be careful while talking to him; perhaps you may have
to approve what he says. Second, a dog. When it chases you or barks at
you, you must stand still, talk to it gently, and pacify it. Third, a
bull. If it runs after you with lowered horns, you must calm it with a
gentle voice. Fourth, a drunkard. If you arouse his anger, he will abuse
you, naming fourteen generations of your family. You should say to him:
\'Hello uncle! How are you?\' Then he will be mightily pleased and sit
by you and smoke.

\"In the presence of a wicked person I become alert. If such a man asks
me whether I have a pipe for smoking, I say, \'Yes, I have.\' Some
people have the nature of a snake: they will bite you without warning.
You have to discriminate a great deal in order to avoid the bite;
otherwise your passion will be stirred up to such an extent that you
will feel like doing injury in return. The companionship of a holy man
is greatly needed now and then. It enables one to discriminate between
the Real and the unreal.\"

VIJAY: \"I have no time, sir. I am entangled in my duties here.\"

MASTER: \"You are a religious teacher. Others have holidays, but not so
a religious teacher. When the manager of an estate brings order to one
part of it, the landlord sends him to another part. So you have no
leisure.\" (all laugh)

VIJAY (with folded hands): \"Sir, please give me your blessing.\"

MASTER: \"Now you are talking like an ignorant person. It is God alone
who blesses.\"

VIJAY: \"Revered sir, please give us some instruction.\"

The Master glanced around the Brahmo temple and said with a smile,
\"This is nice too-a mixture of crystals and syrup. There are crystals,
and there is syrup too.

\"I have scored too many points and am therefore out of the game (all
laugh). Do you know the game called \'nax\'? It is a game of cards, and
anyone scoring above seventeen is out of the game. Those who score fewer
points-say five, seven, or ten-are clever. I have scored too many and am
out of the game.

\"Once Keshab Sen gave a lecture at his house. I was present. Many
people were there. The ladies were seated behind the screen. Keshab, in
the course of his talk, said, \'O God, please bless us that we may dive
and disappear altogether in the river of bhakti.\' I said to Keshab with
a smile: \'If you disappear altogether in the river of bhakti, then what
will be the fate of those behind the screen? By all means dive into the
river, but you had better come back to dry land now and then: Don\'t
disappear in the river altogether.\' At these words Keshab and the
others burst out laughing.

\"Never mind. One can realize God in the world, too, if only one is
sincere. \'I\' and \'mine\'-that is ignorance. But, \'O God! Thou and
Thine\'-that is knowledge.

**Advice to householders**

\"Live in the world like a maidservant in a rich man\'s house. She
performs all the household duties, brings up her master\'s child, and
speaks of him as \'my Hari\'. But in her heart she knows quite well that
neither the house nor the child belongs to her. She performs all her
duties, but just the same her mind dwells on her native place. Likewise,
do your worldly duties but fix your mind on God. And know that house,
family, and son do not belong to you; they are God\'s. You are only His
servant.

\"I ask people to renounce mentally. I do not ask them to give up the
world. If one lives in the world unattached and seeks God with
sincerity, then one is able to attain Him.

(To Vijay) \"There was a time when I too would meditate on God with my
eyes closed. Then I said to myself: \'Does God exist only when I think
of Him with my eyes closed? Doesn\'t He exist when I look around with my
eyes open?\' Now, when I look around with my eyes open, I see that God
dwells in all beings. He is the Indwelling Spirit of all-men, animals
and other living beings, trees and plants, sun and moon, land and water.

\"Why do I seek Shivanath? He who meditates on God for many days has
substance in him, has divine power in him. Further, he who sings well,
plays well on a musical instrument, or has mastered anyone art, has in
him real substance and the power of God. This is the view of the Gitā.
It is said in the Chandi that he who is endowed with physical beauty has
in him substance and the power of God. (To Vijay) Ah, what a beautiful
nature Kedār has! No sooner does he come to me than he bursts into
tears. His eyes are always red and swim in tears, like a chanabara in
syrup.\"

VIJAY: \"At Dāccā he is constantly talking about you. He is always eager
to see you.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was about to depart. The Brahmo devotees bowed low
before him and he returned their salute. Then, getting into the
carriage, he set out for Adhar\'s house to see the image of the Divine
Mother.

**Sunday, September 28, 1884**

It was the day of the Mahāshtami, the most auspicious day of the worship
of Durga, the Divine Mother. At Adhar\'s invitation Sri Ramakrishna had
come to Calcutta to see the holy image at his house. Before going there
he went to Ram\'s. Many devotees, including Narendra, Baburam, M.,
Niranjan, Vijay, Kedār, Ram, and Surendra, were present. Balarām and
Rākhāl were still at Vrindāvan.

MASTER (looking at Vijay and Kedār, with a smile): \"This is a nice
reunion today. You two have the same spiritual mood. (To Vijay) Well,
what about Shivanath? Did you-?\"

VIJAY: \"Yes, sir, he heard that you had been to his house. I haven\'t
seen him, but I sent him word. He knows about it.\"

MASTER (to Vijay and the others); \"Four desires have come into my mind.
I shall eat fish curry cooked with egg-plant. I shall visit Shivanath.
The devotees will repeat the name of Hari over their beads, and I shall
watch them. And the Tantrik devotees will drink consecrated wine, eight
*ānnās* worth, on the ashtami day, and I shall watch them and salute
them.\"

Narendra was seated in front of the Master. He was about twenty-two
years old. While Sri Ramakrishna was talking thus his eyes fell upon his
beloved disciple. At once the Master stood up and went into samādhi. He
placed one foot on Narendra\'s knee. He was in a deep spiritual mood,
his eyes unblinking, his mind completely unconscious of the outer world.
After a long time he came down to the relative plane of consciousness;
but he still appeared dazed, for the intoxication of divine bliss had
not altogether left him. Speaking to himself in that ecstatic state, he
repeated the name of God. He said: \"Satchidananda! Satchidananda!
Satchidananda! Shall I repeat that? No, it is the day of the Divine
Mother, the Giver of the bliss of divine inebriation. O Mother, full of
the bliss of divine inebriation! Sa, re, ga, ma, pa, dha, ni. It is not
good to keep the voice on \'ni\'. It is not possible to keep it there
very long. I shall keep it on the next lower note.

**Difference between ordinary men and Incarnations**

\"There are different planes of consciousness: the gross, the subtle,
the causal, and the Great Cause. Entering the Mahakarana, the Great
Cause, one becomes silent; one cannot utter a word.

\"But an Isvarakoti, after attaining the Great Cause, can come down
again to the lower planes. Incarnations of God, and others like them,
belong to the class of the Isvarakotis. They climb up, and they can also
come down. They climb to the roof, and they can come down again by the
stairs and move about on a lower floor. It is a case of negation and
affirmation. There is, for instance, the seven-storey palace of a king.
Strangers have access only to the lower apartments; but the prince, who
knows the palace to be his own, can move up and down from floor to
floor. There is a kind of rocket that throws out sparks in one pattern
and then seems to go out. After a moment it makes another pattern, and
then still another. There is no end to the patterns it can make. But
there is another kind of rocket that, when it is lighted, makes only a
dull sound, throws out a few sparks, and then goes out altogether. Like
this second kind, an ordinary jiva, after much spiritual effort, can go
to a higher plane; but he cannot come down to tell others his
experiences. After much effort he may go into samādhi; but he cannot
climb down from that state or tell others what he has seen there.

**Nature of the ever-perfect**

\"There is a class of devotees, the nityasiddhas, the ever-perfect. From
their very birth they seek God. They do not enjoy anything of the world.

**Illustration of homa bird**

The Vedas speak of the homa bird. It lives very high in the sky. There
the mother bird lays her egg. She lives so high that the egg falls for
many days. While falling it is hatched. The chick continues to fall.
That also goes on for many days. In the mean time the chick develops
eyes. Coming near the earth, it becomes conscious of the world. It
realizes it will meet certain death if it hits the ground. Then it gives
a shrill cry and shoots up toward its mother. The earth means death, and
it frightens the young bird; it then seeks its mother. She

dwells high up in the sky, and the young bird shoots straight up in that
direction. It doesn\'t look anywhere else.

\"Those who are born as the companions of an Incarnation of God are
eternally perfect. For some of them that birth is the last.

(To Vijay) \"You have both-yoga and bhoga. King Janaka also had yoga and
bhoga. Therefore he is called a rajarshi, both king and seer. Nārada was
a devarshi, and Sukadeva a brahmarshi. Yes, Sukadeva was a brahmarshi.
He was not a mere Jnāni; he was the very embodiment of Jnāna, Divine
Knowledge. Whom do I call a Jnāni? A man who has attained Knowledge and
has done so after much effort. Sukadeva was the very image of Knowledge,
in other words, a form of concentrated Knowledge. He attained Knowledge
spontaneously, without any labour.\"

Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna came down to the normal mood. Then he
talked freely with the devotees. The Master asked Kedār to sing.

Kedār sang:

> *How shall I open my heart, O friend?*
>
> *It is forbidden me to speak.*
>
> *I am about to die, for lack of a kindred soul*
>
> *To understand my misery. . . .*

Kedār sang several other songs. After the music the Master again talked
to the devotees. Nandalal, Keshab\'s nephew, was also present with a few
brahmo friends. They were sitting near the Master.

MASTER (to Vijay and the other devotees): \"A man brought a bottle of
consecrated wine for me; but I couldn\'t even touch it.\"

VIJAY: \"Ah!\"

MASTER: \"I become intoxicated at the mere thought of God. I don\'t have
to take any wine. I feel drunk at the very sight of the charanamrita. I
feel as if I had drunk five bottles of liquor. When a person attains
such a state he cannot help discriminating about food.\"

NARENDRA: \"As regards food, one should take whatever comes.\"

MASTER: \"What you say applies only to a particular state of the
aspirant\'s mind. No food can harm a Jnāni.

According to the Gitā, the Jnāni himself does not eat; his eating is an
offering to the Kundalini. But that does not apply to a bhakta. The
present state of my mind is such that I cannot eat any food unless it is
first offered to God by a brahmin priest. Formerly my state of mind was
such that I would enjoy inhaling the smell of burning corpses, carried
by the wind from the other side of the Ganges. It tasted very sweet to
me. But nowadays I cannot eat food touched by anybody and everybody. No,
I cannot. But once in a while I do. One day I was taken to see a
performance of a play at Keshab\'s house. They gave me luchi and curries
to eat. I didn\'t know whether the food was handed to me by a washerman
or a barber; but I ate quite a little (all laugh). Rākhāl had asked me
to eat.

(To Narendra) \"With you it is all right. You are in \'this\' as well as
in \'that\'. You can eat everything now. (To the devotees) Blessed is he
who feels longing for God, though he eats pork. But shame on him whose
mind dwells on \'woman and gold\', though he eats the purest food-boiled
vegetables, rice, and ghee.

\"Once I had a desire to eat dal cooked in a blacksmith\'s house. From
my childhood I had heard the blacksmiths say, \'Do the brahmins know how
to cook?\' I ate the dal, but it smelt of the blacksmith. (all laugh)

\"I received the Allah mantra from Govinda Rai. Rice was cooked for me
with onions in the kuthi. I ate some. I ate curry in Mani Mallick\'s
garden house, but I felt a kind of repulsion to it.

\"When I went to Kamarpukur, Ramlal\'s father was frightened. He thought
I might eat at any and every house.

He was frightened to think I might be expelled from the caste; so I
couldn\'t stay long. I came away.

\"Both the Vedas and the Puranas describe pure food and conduct. But
what the Vedas and the Puranas ask people to shun as impure is extolled
by the Tantra as good.

**Master\'s divine madness**

\"Oh, what a state of mind I passed through! I would open my mouth,
touching, as it were, heaven and the nether world with my jaws, and
utter the word \'Ma\'. I felt that I had seized the Mother, like a
fisherman dragging fish in his net. Let me recite a song:

> *This time I shall devour Thee utterly, Mother Kāli!*
>
> *For I was born under an evil star,*
>
> *And one so born becomes, they say, the eater of his mother.*
>
> *Thou must devour me first, or I myself shall eat Thee up;*
>
> *One or the other it must be.*
>
> *I shall besmear my hands with black, and with black my face;*
>
> *With black I shall besmear the whole of my body*
>
> *And when Death seizes me, with black I shall besmear his face.*
>
> *O Mother, I shall eat Thee up but not digest Thee;*
>
> *I shall install Thee in my heart*
>
> *And make Thee offerings with my mind.*
>
> *You may say that by eating Kāli I shall embroil myself*
>
> *With Kala, Her Husband, but I am not afraid;*
>
> *Braving His anger, I shall chant my Mother\'s name.*
>
> *To show the world that Ramprasad is Kāli\'s rightful son,*
>
> *Come what may, I shall eat Thee up-Thee and Thy retinue-*
>
> *Or lose my life attempting it.*

*\"I almost became mad-such was my longing for God.\"*

Narendra began to sing:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason? . . .*

Listening to the song, the Master again went into samādhi. Coming down
to the normal plane, he assumed the attitude of Girirani and sang the
*Āgamani*. He sang, intoxicated with divine love:

Tell me, my Uma, how have you fared, alone in the Stranger\'s house? . .
.

He said to the devotees, \"Today is the Mahashtami. The Mother has come;
that is why I feel such an awakening of spiritual emotion.\"

KEDĀR: \"Lord, you are here. Are you different from the Divine Mother?\"

Sri Ramakrishna looked in another direction and sang in an absent-minded
mood:

Ah, friend! I have not found Him yet, whose love has driven me mad\....

Again he became ecstatic and sang of the Divine Mother. As he sang,
Vijay suddenly stood up crying the name of Hari. Sri Ramakrishna, full
of divine love, began to dance with Vijay and the other devotees.

The music was over. The Master, Vijay, Narendra, and the other devotees
sat down. All eyes were fixed on Sri Ramakrishna, who began conversing
with the devotees. He asked about their health. Kedār spoke to him
humbly in a soft, sweet voice. Narendra, Chunilal, Ram, M., and Harish
were sitting by the Master.

KEDĀR (humbly): \"How can I get rid of my dizziness?\"

MASTER (tenderly): \"One gets that. I have had it myself.

Use a little almond oil. I have heard that it cures dizziness.\"

KEDĀR: \"I shall, sir.\"

MASTER (to Chunilal): \"Hello! How is everything?\"

CHUNILAL: \"Everything is all right with us now. Balarām Babu and Rākhāl
are well at Vrindāvan.\"

MASTER: \"Why have you sent so many sweetmeats? (To Harish) Wait a day
or two before coming to Dakshineswar. You are not well. You may fall ill
again there. (To Narayan, tenderly) Sit here. Sit by me. Come to
Dakshineswar tomorrow and have your meal there. (Pointing to M.) Come
with him. (To M.) What do you say?\"

M. wanted to accompany Sri Ramakrishna to Dakshineswar that very day. He
became thoughtful.

Surendra stood near Sri Ramakrishna. He was in the habit of drinking and
often went to excess. This had worried the Master greatly, but he had
not asked Surendra to give up drinking altogether. He had said to him:
\"Look here, Surendra! Whenever you drink wine, offer it beforehand to
the Divine Mother. See that your brain doesnt become clouded and that
you don\'t reel The more you think of the Divine Mother, the less you
will like to drink The Mother is the Giver of the bliss of divine
inebriation. Realizing Her, one feels a natural bliss.\"

The Master looked at Surendra and said, \"You have had a drink.\" With
these words he went into samādhi. It was dusk. Regaining partial
consciousness, the Master sang:

> *Behold my Mother playing with Śiva, lost in an ecstasy of joy!*
>
> *Drunk with a draught of celestial wine, She reels, and yet She does
> not fall. . .*

Then he chanted the name of Hari, clapping his hands occasionally. In a
sweet voice he said: \"Hari! Hari! O

mind, chant the name of Hari! Sing the name of Hari!\" Then he chanted:
\"Rāma! Rāma Rāma! Rāma!\"

Now the Master began to pray: \"O Rāma! O Rāma! I am without devotion
and austerity, without knowledge and love; I have not performed any
religious rites. O Rāma, I have taken refuge in Thee; I have taken
shelter at Thy feet. I do not want creature comforts; I do not seek name
and fame. O Rāma, I do not crave the eight occult powers; I do not care
for a hundred occult powers! I am Thy servant. I have taken refuge in
Thee. Grant, O Rāma, that I may have pure love for Thy Lotus Feet; that
I may not be deluded by Thy world-bewitching māyā! O Rāma, I have taken
refuge it Thee.\"

As the Master prayed all eyes were turned toward him. Hearing his
piteous voice, few could restrain their tears.

Ramchandra Dutta came in and stood near him.

MASTER: \"Where have you been, Ram?\"

RAM: \"I was upstairs, sir.\"

Ram had been making arrangements for feeding the devotees on the roof of
the house.

MASTER (to Ram, with a smile): \"Isn\'t it better to stay down below
that to be high up? Water accumulates in low land but flows down from a
high mound.\"

RAM (with a smile): \"That is true, sir.\"

Supper was ready on the roof. Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees were
taken there and sumptuously fed. Later the Master went to Adhar\'s house
with M., Niranjan, and others. The Divine Mother was being worshipped
there, It had been Adhar\'s earnest prayer that on this sacred day Sri
Ramakrishna might bless his house with his presence.

**Monday, September 29, 1884**

It was the third day of the Durga Puja. The Master had been awake in his
room at Dakshineswar since early morning. The morning worship in the
Kāli temple was over and the orchestra had played the morning melodies
in the nahabat. Brahmans and gardeners, basket in hand, were plucking
flowers for the worship of the Divine Mother. Bhavanath, Baburam,
Niranjan, and M. had spent the night at Dakshineswar, sleeping on the
porch of the Master\'s room. As soon as they awoke they saw Sri
Ramakrishna dancing in an ecstatic mood. He was chanting: \"Victory to
Mother Durga! Hallowed be the name of Durga!\" He was naked and looked
like a child as he chanted the name of the Blissful Mother. After a few
moments he said: \"Oh, the bliss of divine ecstasy! Oh, the bliss of
divine drunkenness!\" Then he repeatedly chanted the name of Govinda:
\"O Govinda! My life! My soul!\"

The devotees sat on their beds and with unwinking eyes watched Sri
Ramakrishna\'s spiritual mood. Hazra was living at the temple garden.
Lātu was also living there to render the Master personal service. Rākhāl
was still at Vrindāvan. Narendra visited Sri Ramakrishna now and then.
He was expected that day.

The devotees washed their faces. The Master took his seat on a mat on
the north verandah. Bhavanath and M.

sat beside him. Other devotees were coming in and out of the room.

MASTER (to Bhavanath): \"The truth is that ordinary men cannot easily
have faith. But an Isvarakoti\'s faith is spontaneous. Prahlada burst
into tears while writing the letter \'ka\'. It reminded him of Krishna.
It is the nature of jivas to doubt. They say yes, no doubt, but-

**Oneness of Śakti and Brahman**

\"Hazra can never be persuaded to believe that Brahman and Śakti, that
Śakti and the Being endowed with Śakti, are one and the same. When the
Reality appears as Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer, we call It Śakti;
when It is inactive, we call It Brahman. But really It is one and the
same thing-indivisible. Fire naturally brings to mind its power to burn;
and the idea of burning naturally brings to mind the idea of fire. It is
impossible to think of the one without the other.

\"So I prayed to the Divine Mother: \'O Mother! Hazra is trying to upset
the views of this place. Either give him right understanding or take him
from here.\' The next day he carne to me and said, \'Yes, I agree with
you.\' He said that God exists everywhere as All-pervading
Consciousness.\"

BHAVANATH (smiling): \"Did what Hazra said really make you suffer so
much?\"

MASTER: \"You see, I am now in a different mood. I can\'t shout and
carry on heated discussions with people. I am not in a mood now to argue
and quarrel with Hazra. Hriday said to me at Jadu Mallick\'s garden
house, \'Uncle, don\'t you want to keep me with you?\' \'No,\' I said,
\'I am no longer in a mood to get into heated arguments with you.\'

**Knowledge and ignorance**

\"What is knowledge and what is ignorance? A man is ignorant so long as
he feels that God is far away. He has knowledge when he knows that God
is here and everywhere.

**Childlike faith**

\"When a man has true knowledge he feels that everything is filled with
Consciousness. At Kamarpukur I used to talk to Shibu, who was then a lad
four or five years old. When the clouds rumbled and lightning flashed,
Shibu would say to me: \'There, uncle! They are striking matches
again!\' (all laugh) One day I noticed him chasing grasshoppers by
himself. The leaves rustled in the near-by trees. \'Hush! Hush!\' he
said to the leaves. \'I want to catch the grasshoppers.\' He was a child
and saw everything throbbing with consciousness. One cannot realize God
without the faith that knows no guile, the simple faith of a child.

\"Ah, what a state of mind I passed through! One day something bit me
while I was sitting in the grass. I was afraid it might have been a
snake, and I didn\'t know what to do. I had heard that if a snake bites
you again immediately after its first bite, it takes back. its own
venom. At once I set out to discover the hole so that I might let the
snake bite me again. While I was searching, a man said to me, \'What are
you doing?\' After listening to my story, he said, \'But the snake must
bite in the very same place it has bitten before.\' Thereupon I went
away. Perhaps I had been bitten by a scorpion or some other insect.

\"I had heard from Ramlal that the autumn chill was good for one\'s
health. Ramlal had quoted a verse to support it. One day, as I was
returning from Calcutta in a carriage, I stuck my head out of the window
so that I might get all the chill. Then I fell ill.\" (all laugh)

Sri Ramakrishna entered his room and sat down. His legs were a little
swollen. He asked the devotees to feel his legs and see whether or not
the pressure of their fingers made dimples. Dimples did appear with the
pressure, but the devotees said that it was nothing.

MASTER (to Bhavanath): \"Please ask Mahendra of Sinthi to see me. I
shall feel better if he reassures me.\"

BHAVANATH (with a smile): \"You have great faith in medicine. But we
haven\'t so much.\"

MASTER: \"It is God who, as the doctor, prescribes the medicine. It is
He who, in one form, has become the physician. Dr. Gangaprasad asked me
not to drink water at night. I regarded his statement as the words of
the Vedas. I look upon him as the physician of heaven.\"

Hazra entered the room and sat down. The Master talked awhile about
different things and then said to Hazra: \"You see, many people were at
Ram\'s house yesterday. Vijay, Kedār, and others were there. But why did
I feel so deeply stirred at the sight of Narendra? I found that Kedār
belonged to the realm of Divine Inebriation.\"

Presently Narendra arrived, and Sri Ramakrishna was exceedingly happy.
Narendra saluted the Master and began to talk with Bhavanath and others
in the room. M. was seated near by. A long mat was spread on the floor.
While talking, Narendra lay on it flat on his stomach. The Master looked
at him and suddenly went into samādhi. He sat on Narendra\'s back in an
ecstatic mood.

Bhavanath sang:

> *O Mother, ever blissful as Thou art,*
>
> *Do not deprive Thy worthless child of bliss! . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna came down from the plane of samādhi. He sang:

> *Repeat, O mind, my Mother Durga\'s hallowed name!*
>
> *O Gauri! O Narayani! to Thee I bow.*
>
> *Thou art the day, O Mother! Thou art the dusk and the night.*
>
> *As Rāma Thou drawest the bow, as Krishna Thou playest the flute;*
>
> *As Kāli all-terrible, Thou hast silenced Śiva, Thy Lord.*
>
> *The ten Embodiments of Divine Śakti art Thou,*
>
> *And Thou the ten Avatars; this time save me Thou must!*
>
> *With flowers and vilwa-leaves did Yaśoda worship Thee,*
>
> *And Thou didst bless her by placing Krishna, the Child, in her arms.*
>
> *Wherever I chance to live, O Mother, in forest or grove,*
>
> *May my mind, day and night, dwell at Thy Lotus Feet;*
>
> *Whether at last I die a natural or sudden death,*
>
> *Oh, may my tongue repeat Durga\'s name at the end!*
>
> *Thou mayest send me away, O Mother, but where shall I go?*
>
> *Tell me, Mother, where else shall I hear so sweet a name?*
>
> *Thou mayest even say to me: \"Step aside! Go away!\"*
>
> *Yet I shall cling to Thee, O Durga! Unto Thy feet*
>
> *As Thine anklets I shall cling, making their tinkling sound.*
>
> *When, O Mother, Thou sittest at mighty Śiva\'s side,*
>
> *Then I shall cry from Thy feet, \"Victory unto Śiva!\"*
>
> *Mother, when as the Kite, Thou soarest in the sky,*
>
> *There, in the water beneath, as a minnow I shall be swimming;*
>
> *Upon me Thou wilt pounce, and pierce me through with Thy claws.*
>
> *Thus, when the breath of life forsakes me in Thy grip,*
>
> *Do not deny me the shelter of Thy Lotus Feet!*
>
> *From the world\'s bondage free me, 0 Spouse of the Absolute!*
>
> *Thy two feet are my boat to cross this world\'s dark sea.*
>
> *Thou art the heavens and the earth, and Thou the nether world; From
> Thee have the twelve Gopalas and Hari and Brahma sprung. Whoever
> treads the path, repeating \"Durga! Durga!\" Śiva Himself protects
> with His almighty trident.*

Hazra was sitting on the northeast verandah counting the beads of his
rosary. The Master went and sat in front of him, taking the rosary in
his own hands.

MASTER (to Hazra): \"You see, I cannot use the rosary. No, perhaps I
can. Yes, I can with my left hand. But I cannot repeat the name of God
with it.\"

With these words Sri Ramakrishna tried to perform a little japa. But
hardly had he begun when he went into samādhi. He sat in that state a
long time, still holding the rosary in his hand. The devotees looked at
him with wonder in their eyes. Hazra also watched the Master without
uttering a word. After a long time Sri Ramakrishna regained
consciousness of the outer world and said that he was hungry. He often
said such things to bring his mind down to the normal plane. M. was
going to bring something for him to eat. The Master said, \"No, I shall
first go to the Kāli temple.\"

He went across the cement courtyard toward the Kāli temple. On the way
he bowed with folded hands to the twelve Śiva temples. On the left was
the temple of Radhakanta. He went there first and bowed before the
image. Then he entered the Kāli temple and saluted the Mother. Sitting
on a carpet, he offered flowers at the Mother\'s holy feet. He also
placed a flower on his own head. While returning from the temple he
asked Bhavanath to carry the green coconut offered at the temple, and
the charanamrita. Coming back to his room, accompanied by M. and
Bhavanath, he saluted Hazra, who cried out in dismay: \"What are you
doing, sir? What is this?\" The Master said, \"Why should you say it is
wrong?\" Hazra often argued with the Master, declaring that God dwelt in
all beings and that everybody could attain Brahmajnana through sadhana.
He had an exaggerated idea of his own spiritual progress.

It was about noon. The gong and the bells announced the worship and
offering in the various temples. The brahmins, the Vaishnavas, and the
beggars went to the guest-house to have their midday meal. The devotees

of the Master were also to partake of the sacred offerings. He asked
them to go to the guest-house. To Narendra he said: \"Won\'t you take
your meal in my room? All right. Narendra and I will eat here.\"
Bhavanath, Baburam, M., and the other devotees went to the guest-house.

After his meal Sri Ramakrishna rested a few minutes. The devotees were
on the verandah engaged in light conversation. He soon joined them and
was happy in their company. It was about two o\'clock. All were, still
sitting on the verandah, when suddenly Bhavanath appeared in the garb of
a brahmachari, dressed in an ochre cloth, kamandalu in hand, his face
beaming with smiles.

MASTER (with a smile): \"That is his inner feeling. Therefore he has
dressed himself as a brahmachari\"

NARENDRA: \"He has put on the garb of a brahmachari; let me put on the
garb of\' a Tantrik worshipper.\"

HAZRA: \"Then you will have to follow the Tantrik rituals, with women,
wine, and so on.\"

Sri Ramakrishna did not encourage the conversation. Indeed, he made fun
of it.

Suddenly the Master began to dance in an ecstatic mood. He sang:

> *Mother, Thou canst not trick me any more,*
>
> *For I have seen Thy crimson Lotus Feet. . . .*

The Master said: \"Ah, how wonderfully Rajnarayan sings about the Divine
Mother! He sings and dances that way. The music of Nakur Āchārya at
Kamarpukur is also wonderful. Ah, how beautiful his singing and dancing
are!\"

A sādhu was staying at the Panchavati. But he was a hot-tempered man; he
scolded and cursed everyone. He came to the Master\'s room wearing
wooden sandals and asked the Master, \"Can I get fire here?\" Sri
Ramakrishna saluted him and stood with folded hands as long as he
remained in the room.

When he had left, Bhavanath said to the Master with a laugh, \"What
great respect you showed the sādhu!\"

MASTER (smiling): \"You see, he too is Narayana, though full of tamas.
This is the way one should please people who have an excess of tamas.
Besides, he is a sādhu.\"

The devotees were engaged in a game of golokdham. Hazra joined them. The
Master stood by, watching them play. M. and Kishori reached \"heaven\".
Sri Ramakrishna bowed before them and said, \"Blessed are you two
brothers.\" He said to M., aside, \"Don\'t play any more.\" Hazra fell
into \"hell\". The Master said: \"What\'s the matter with Hazra?
Again!\" No sooner had Hazra got out of \"hell\" than he fell into it
again. All burst into laughter. Lātu, at the first throw of the dice,
went to \"heaven\" from \"earth\". He began to cut capers of joy. \"See
Lātu\'s joy!\" said the Master. \"He would have been terribly sad if he
hadn\'t achieved this. (Aside to the devotees) This too has a meaning.
Hazra is so vain that he thinks he will triumph over all even in this
game. This is the law of God, that He never humiliates a righteous
person. Such a man is victorious everywhere.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch in his room. Narendra,
Baburam, Bhavanath, and M. were sitting on the floor. Narendra referred
to various religious sects-the Ghoshpara, Panchanami, and others. Sri
Ramakrishna described their views and condemned their immoral practices.
He said that they could not follow the right course of spiritual
discipline, but enjoyed sensuous pleasures in the name of religion.

**Danger of Tantrik discipline**

MASTER (to Narendra): \"You need not listen to these things. The
bhairavas and the bhairavis of the Tantrik sect also follow this kind of
discipline. While in Benares I was taken to one of their mystic circles.
Each bhairava had a bhairavi with him. I was asked to drink the
consecrated wine, but I said I couldn\'t touch wine. They drank it. I
thought perhaps they would then practise meditation and japa. But
nothing of the sort. They

began to dance. I was afraid they might fall into the Ganges: the circle
had been made on its bank. It is very honourable for husband and wife to
assume the roles of bhairava and bhairavi.

(To Narendra and the others) \"Let me tell you this. I regard woman as
my mother; I regard myself as her son. This is a very pure attitude.
There is no danger in it. To look on woman as a sister is also not bad.
But to assume the attitude of a \'hero\', to look on woman as one\'s
mistress, is the most difficult discipline. Tārak\'s father followed
this discipline. It is very difficult. In this form of sadhana one
cannot always maintain the right attitude.

\"There are various paths to reach God. Each view is a path. It is like
reaching the Kāli temple by different roads. But it must be said that
some paths are clean and some dirty. It is good to travel on a clean
path.

\"Many views, many paths-and I have seen them all. But I don\'t enjoy
them any more; they all quarrel.

**Master\'s inner experiences**

\"No one else is here, and you are my own people. Let me tell you
something. I have come to the final realization that God is the Whole
and I am a part of Him, that God is the Master and I am His servant.
Furthermore, I think every now and then that He is I and I am He.\"

The devotees listened to these words in deep silence.

BHAVANATH (humbly): \"I feel disturbed if I have a misunderstanding with
someone. I feel that in that case I am not able to love all\"

MASTER: \"Try at the outset to talk to him and establish a friendly
relationship with him. If you fail in spite of your efforts, then don\'t
give it another thought. Take refuge in God. Meditate on Him. There is
no use in giving up God and feeling depressed from thinking about
others.\"

BHAVANATH: \"Great souls, such as Christ and Chaitanya, have admonished
us to love all beings.\"

MASTER: \"Love you must, because God dwells in all beings. But salute a
wicked person from a distance. You speak of Chaitanya? He also used to
restrain his spiritual feeling in the presence of unsympathetic people.
At Srivas\'s house he put Srivas\'s mother-in-law out of the room,
dragging her out by the hair.\"

BHAVANATH: \"It was not he but others who did it.\"

MASTER: \"Could the other have done it without his approval? What can be
done? Suppose a man cannot make another love him; must he worry about it
day and night? Must I waste my mind, which should be given to God, on
useless things? I say: \'O Mother, I don\'t want Narendra, Bhavanath,
Rākhāl , or anybody. I seek Thee alone. What shall I do with man?\'

When the Blissful Mother comes to my house, how much of the Chandi I
shall hear!

How many monks will come here, and how many yogis with matted locks!

\"When I attain God I shall attain everything. I renounced gold and
silver, saying, \'Rupee is clay and clay is rupee; gold is clay and clay
is gold.\' With these words I threw gold, silver, and clay into the
Ganges. Then I was afraid at the thought that Mother Lakshmi might be
angry with me because I had treated Her wealth with contempt; that She
might even stop my meals. So I prayed to the Divine Mother, \'O Mother,
I want Thee and nothing else.\' I knew that by realizing Her I should
get everything.\"

BHAVANATH (smiling): \"This is the shrewd calculation of a business
man.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, that is so. Once the Lord was pleased with a
certain devotee. He appeared before him

and said: \'I am very much pleased with your austerities. Ask a boon of
Me.\' The devotee said, \'O Lord, if You

are gracious enough to give me a boon, then please grant that I may eat
from gold plates with my grandchildren.\' One boon covered many
things-wealth, children, and grandchildren.\" (all laugh)

Hazra was sitting on the verandah.

MASTER: \"Do you know what Hazra wants? He wants money. His family is in
distress; he has debts. He thinks that God will give him money because
he devotes himself to japa and meditation.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Can\'t God fulfil a devotee\'s desire?\"

MASTER: \"If it is His sweet will. But God doesn\'t take entire
responsibility for a devotee unless the devotee is completely
intoxicated with ecstatic love for Him. At a feast it is only a child
whom one takes by the hand and seats at his place. Who does that with
older people? Not until a man thinks so much of God that he cannot look
after himself does God take on his responsibilities. Hazra doesn\'t
inquire about his family. His son said to Ramlal: \'Please ask father to
come home. We shall not ask anything of him.\' These words almost
brought tears to my eyes. Hazra\'s mother said to Ramlal: \'Please ask
Pratap to come home just once. Also ask your uncle to request him to
come home.\' I told him about it, but he didn\'t listen to me.

**Duty toward mother**

\"Is a mother to be trifled .with? Before becoming a sannyasi
Chaitanyadeva worked hard to persuade his mother to let him renounce
home. Mother Sachi said that she would kill Keshab Bharati.
Chaitanyadeva did his utmost to persuade her. He said: \'Mother, I shall
not renounce home if you won\'t let me. But if you compel me to lead a
householder\'s life, I shall die. And, mother, even if I go away as a
sannyasi, you will be able to see me whenever you desire. I shall stay
near you. I shall see you every now and then.\' Only when Chaitanya
explained it to her thus did she give her permission. Nārada could not
go to the forest to practise austerity as long as his mother was alive.
He had to take care of her. After her death he went away to realize God.

\"When I went to Vrindāvan I felt no desire to return to Calcutta. It
was arranged that I should live with Gangama. Everything was settled. My
bed was to be on one side and Gangama\'s on the other. I resolved not to
go back to Calcutta. I said to myself, \'How long must I eat a
kaivarta\'s food?\' \'No,\' said Hriday to me, \'let us go to
Calcutta.\' He pulled me by one hand and Gangama pulled me by the other.
I felt an intense desire to live at Vrindāvan. But just then I
remembered my mother. That completely changed everything. She was old. I
said to myself: \'My devotion to God will take to its wings if I have to
worry about my mother. I would rather live with her. Then I shall have
peace of mind and be able to meditate on God.\'

(To Narendra) \"Why don\'t you say a few words to Hazra about going
home? The other day he said to me, \'Yes, I shall go home and stay there
three days.\' But now he has forgotten all about it.

(To the devotees) \"We have talked about filthy things-Ghoshpara and
things like that. Govinda! Govinda! Govinda! Now chant the name of Hari.
Let there be a dish of rice pudding and sweets after the ordinary
lentils.\"

Narendra began to sing:

> *Fasten your mind, O man, on the Primal Purusha,*
>
> *Who is the Cause of all causes,*
>
> *The Stainless One, the Beginningless Truth.*
>
> *As Prana He pervades the infinite universe;*
>
> *The man of faith beholds Him,*
>
> *Living, resplendent, the Root of all.*
>
> *Beyond the senses, eternal, the Essence of Consciousness,*
>
> *He shines in the cave of the heart,*
>
> *Adorned with Holiness, Wisdom, and Love;*
>
> *By meditating on Him, man is delivered from grief.*
>
> *Of countenance ever serene,*
>
> *An inexhaustible Ocean of Virtue,*
>
> *None can fathom His depths; yet freely, of His own grace,*
>
> *Does He reveal Himself*
>
> *To those who come to His feet for shelter,*
>
> *Merciful since they are helpless and He is the Ever-forgiving, The
> Giver of happiness,*
>
> *The Ready Help in the sea of our woe.*
>
> *Unswervingly just, bestowing the fruits of our deeds, good and ill,*
>
> *Yet is He the Fount of Compassion,*
>
> *The Ocean of Mercy brimming with Love;*
>
> *Even to hear of His glory suffuses the eyes with tears.*
>
> *Gaze on His face and be blest:*
>
> *Your heart is hungry for Him, O man!*
>
> *Bright with unspeakable beauty, peerless and without stain,*
>
> *No words can ever describe Him;*
>
> *Be as a beggar before His gate*
>
> *And worship Him day and night, beseeching Him for His grace.*

He sang again:

> *In Wisdom\'s firmament the moon of Love is rising full,*
>
> *And Love\'s Hood-tide, in surging waves, is flowing everywhere.*
>
> *O Lord, how full of bliss Thou art! Victory unto Thee!*
>
> *On every side shine devotees, like stars around the moon;*
>
> *Their Friend, the Lord All-merciful, joyously plays with them.*
>
> *Behold! the gates of paradise today are open wide. . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna was dancing in a circle. The devotees joined him. They
all sang and danced. Their bliss was indescribable. The Master sang
about the Divine Mother:

> *Behold my Mother playing with Śiva, lost in an ecstasy of joy! . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna was highly pleased because M. had joined in the music.
He said to M., with a smile, \"The atmosphere would have been more
intense with divine fervour if a drum had accompanied the music and

played: *\'Tak tak ta dhina! Dak dak da dhina!\' \"*

It was dusk when the kirtan was finished.

**Wednesday, October 1, 1884**

**Master at Adhar\'s house**

Sri Ramakrishna had set out from Dakshineswar for Adhar\'s house in
Calcutta. Narayan and Gangadhar were with him. In the carriage, in an
ecstatic mood, he said: \"Shall I count the beads? How shameful that
would be! This emblem of Śiva has sprung from the bowels of the earth;
it is self created and not set up by man\'s hands.\"

They arrived at Adhar\'s house, where many devotees, including Kedār,
Baburam, and Vijay, had assembled. Vaishnavcharan, the musician, was
present. At the Master\'s behest, Adhar heard Vaishnavcharan\'s music
daily after his return from the office.

When the Master entered Adhar\'s drawing-room the devotees stood up to
receive him. Kedār and Vijay saluted him, and the Master asked Narayan
and Baburam to salute Kedār and Vijay. He asked Kedār and Vijay to bless
Narayan and Baburam that they might have devotion to God. Pointing to
Narayan he said, \"He is utterly guileless.\" The eyes of the devotees
were fixed on the two boys.

MASTER (to Kedār and the other devotees): \"It is good that I have met
you all here; otherwise perhaps you would have come to the Kāli temple
to see me. Through the will of God, however, we have met here.\"

KEDĀR (with folded hands): \"The will of God! It is all your will.\"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled. Vaishnavcharan began a kirtan about Radha and
Krishna. When the music was nearing its end, with the union of Radha and
Krishna, the Master began to dance with ecstatic fervour. The devotees
danced and sang around him. After the music they all sat down. The
Master said to Vijay, referring to Vaishnavcharan, \"He sings very
well.\" He asked the musician to sing the song about Sri Chaitanya,
beginning with the line, \"The beautiful Gaurānga, the youthful dancer,
fair as molten gold.\"

When the song was over, the Master asked Vijay, \"How did you like it?\"

VIJAY: \"Wonderful.\"

Sri Ramakrishna also sang a song about Sri Chaitanya, M. joining him.
Then Vaishnavcharan sang another song:

> *O my flute, sing Hari\'s name!*
>
> *You cannot know the highest Truth*
>
> *Without Lord Hari\'s grace.*
>
> *His name removes our bitter grief:*
>
> *Repeat the name of Hari, then,*
>
> *Repeat Sri Krishna\'s holy name!*
>
> *If He bestows His grace on me,*
>
> *No longer shall be afraid*
>
> *Of this unfriendly world;*
>
> *Sing then Lord Hari\'s name, my flute!*
>
> *Our only treasure is His name.*
>
> *Govinda says: Behold, my days*
>
> *Are passing by in vain:*
>
> *In the world\'s deep and shoreless sea,*
>
> *Oh, let me not be drowned!*

Vaishnavcharan sang again, this time about Mother Durga:

> *O tongue, always repeat the name of Mother Durga; Who but your Mother
> Durga will save you in distress? . . .*

The Master and the musician sang again and again the following lines
from the song:

> *The moving and the unmoving, the gross and the subtle, art Thou:*
>
> *Creation and preservation art Thou, and the last dissolution.*
>
> *Thou art the Primal Root of this manifold universe:*
>
> *The Mother of the three worlds, their only Saviour, art Thou; Thou
> art the Śakti of all, and Thou Thine own Śakti, too.*

Kedār and several devotees stood up. They were about to return home.
Kedār saluted the Master and bade him good-bye.

MASTER: \"Should you go away without bidding Adhar good-bye? Wouldn\'t
that be an act of discourtesy?\"

KEDĀR: \" \'When God is pleased, the world is pleased.\' You are
staying; so in a sense we are all staying. I am

not feeling well. Besides, I am a little nervous about my social
conventions. Once before I had trouble with our community.\"

VIJAY: (pointing to the Master): \"Should we go away and leave him
here?\"

Just then Adhar came in to take the Master to the dining-room, for the
meal was ready. Sri Ramakrishna stood up and said, addressing Kedār and
Vijay: \"Come. Come with me.\" They followed him and partook of the
dinner together with the other devotees.

After dinner they all returned to the drawing-room, where the devotees
sat around the Master. Kedār said to him with folded hands, \'Please
forgive me for hesitating to eat here.\' Perhaps the thought had come to
his mind that he should not have hesitated, since the Master himself had
no scruples about eating at Adhar\'s house.

Kedār worked at Dāccā. Many devotees brought offerings of sweets and
other food for him. Referring to this, Kedār said to the Master:
\"People want to give me food. What should I do? Lord, what is your
command in this matter?\"

MASTER: \"One can eat food even from an untouchable if the untouchable
is a devotee of God. After spending seven years in a God-intoxicated
state at Dakshineswar, I visited Kamarpukur. Oh, what a state of mind I
was in at that time! Even a prostitute fed me with her own hands. But I
cannot allow that now.\"

Kedār was about to take his leave.

KEDĀR (in a low voice): \"Lord, please transmit power to me. Many people
come to me. What do I know?\"

MASTER: \"Everything will be all right. One gets along well if one is
sincerely devoted to God.\"

Yogendra, the editor of a Bengali paper, the Bangavasi, entered the
room. The conversation turned to the Personal God and God without form.

MASTER: \"God has form; again, He is formless. How many aspects He has!
We cannot comprehend Him. Why should we say that God is formless only?\"

YOGENDRA: \"That is the one amazing thing about the Brahmo Samaj. There
even a boy twelve years old sees God as formless. The members of the Adi
Samaj do not object very much to God with form. They are allowed to
attend ritualistic worship if it takes place in respectable families.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"How nicely he has put it! Even a boy sees the
formless God!\"

ADHAR: \"Shivanath Babu does not believe in God\'s forms.\"

VIJAY: \"That is his mistake. (Pointing to the Master) As he says, the
chameleon assumes different colours-now this colour, now that. Only the
man who lives under the tree knows the animal\'s true colour.

\"While meditating I saw images of gods painted on a canvas. How many
gods! How many different things they said! I said to myself: \'I shall
go to the Master. He will explain it all to me.\' \"

MASTER: \"You saw correctly.\"

KEDĀR: \"God assumes forms for the sake of His devotees. Through
ecstatic love a devotee sees God with form. Dhruva had a vision of the
Lord. He said: \'Why don\'t your ear-rings move?\' The Lord said, \'They
will move if you move them.\' \"

MASTER: \"One must accept everything: God with form and God without
form. While meditating in the Kāli

temple I noticed Ramani, a prostitute. I said, \'Mother, I see that Thou
art in that form too.\' Therefore I say one must accept everything. One
does not know when or how God will reveal Himself.\"

The Master sang:

> *A mendicant has come to us, ever absorbed in divine moods. . .*

VIJAY: \"God has infinite power. Can He not reveal Himself in any form
He chooses? Man is a speck of dust, and he dares come to a conclusion
about God. How amazing!\"

MASTER: \"A man reads a little of the Gitā, the Bhagavata, or the
Vedānta and thinks he has understood everything. Once an ant went to a
hill of sugar. One grain of sugar filled its stomach, and it was
returning home with another grain in its mouth. On the way it said to
itself, \'The next time I go, I shall bring home the whole hill.\' \"
(All laugh)

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 30**

THE MASTER IN VARIOUS MOODS

> Thursday, October 2, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in his room at Dakshineswar. Lātu, Ramlal,
Harish, and Hazra were living with him at the temple garden. Baburam
spent a day or two with him now and then.

Manilal Mallick, Priya Mukherji and his relative Hari, a bearded Brahmo
devotee from Shibpur, and several Mārwāri devotees from Calcutta were in
the Master\'s room. Manilal was an old member of the Brahmo Samaj.

MASTER (to Manilal and the others): \"It is wise to salute a person
mentally. What need is there of touching his feet? Mental salutation
doesn\'t embarrass anybody.

\"The attitude that my religion alone is right and all other religions
are false is not good. I see that God Himself has become all these: men;
images, and salagram. I see one alone in all these; I do not see two. I
see only one.

\"Many people think that their opinion alone is right and others\'
opinions are wrong; that they alone have won and others have lost. But a
person who has gone forward may be detained by some slight obstacle, and
someone who has been lagging behind may then steal a march on him. In
the game of golokdham one may advance a great deal, but still somehow
one\'s piece may fail to reach the goal.

**Inscrutability of God\'s ways**

\"Triumph or defeat is in the hands of God. We cannot understand His
ways. You must have noticed that the green coconut remains high in the
tree and is exposed to the sun, but still its milk is cool. On the other
hand the paniphal remains in the water, but when eaten it heats the
body. \"Look at the body of man. The head is the root, and it is at the
top.\"

**Two ways of Yoga**

MANILAL: \"What then is our duty?\"

MASTER: \"To remain somehow united with God. There are two ways:
karmayoga and manoyoga. Householders practise yoga through karma, the
performance of duty.

There are four stages of life: brahmacharya, garhasthya, vanaprastha,
and sannyās. Sannyāsis must renounce those karmas which are performed
with special ends in view; but they should perform the daily obligatory
karmas, giving up all desire for results. Sannyāsis are united with God
by such karmas as the acceptance of the staff, the receiving of alms,
going on pilgrimage, and the performance of worship and japa.

\"It doesn\'t matter what kind of action you are engaged in. You can be
united with God through any action provided that, performing it, you
give up all desire for its result.

\"There is the other path: manoyoga. A yogi practising this discipline
doesn\'t show any outward sign. He is inwardly united with God. Take
Jadabharata and Sukadeva, for instance. There are many other yogis of
this class, but these two are well known. They shave neither hair nor
beard.

\"All actions drop away when a man reaches the stage of the paramahamsa.
He always remembers the ideal and meditates on it. He is always united
with God in his mind. If he ever performs an action it is to teach men.

\"A man may be united with God either through action or through
inwardness of thought, but he can know everything through bhakti.
Through bhakti one spontaneously experiences kumbhaka. The nerve
currents and

breathing calm down when the mind is concentrated. Again, the mind is
concentrated when the nerve currents and breathing calm down. Then the
buddhi, the discriminating power, becomes steady. The man who achieves
this state is not himself aware of it.

**Efficacy of bhakti-yoga**

\"One can attain everything through bhakti yoga. I wept before the
Mother and prayed, \'O Mother, please tell me, please reveal to me, what
the yogis have realized through yoga and the jnanis through
discrimination.\' And the Mother has revealed everything to me. She
reveals everything if the devotee cries to Her with a yearning heart.
She has shown me everything that is in the Vedas, the Vedānta, the
Puranas, and the Tantra.\"

MANILAL: \"And what about hathayoga?\"

MASTER: \"The hathayogis identify themselves with their bodies. They
practise internal washing and similar disciplines, and devote themselves
only to the care of the body. Their ideal is to increase longevity. They
serve the body day and night. That is not good.

**Householder\'s duty**

\"What is your duty? You should renounce \'woman and gold\' mentally.
You cannot look on the world as crow-droppings.

\"The goswamis are householders. Therefore I said to them: \'You have
your duties in the temple; how can you renounce the world? You cannot
explain away the world as māyā.\'

\"Chaitanyadeva said that the duties of householders were kindness to
living beings, service to the Vaishnavas, and the chanting of God\'s
holy name.

\"Keshab Sen once said about me: \'Now he asks us to hold to both-God
and the world. But one day he will sting us.\' No, that is not true. Why
should I sting?\"

MANI MALLICK: \"But, sir, you do.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"How so? You are a householder. Why should you
renounce?

**Complete renunciation for religious teachers**

\"But the renunciation of the world is needful for those whom God wants
to be teachers of men. One who is an Āchārya should give up \'woman and
gold\'; otherwise people will not take his advice. It is not enough for
him to renounce only mentally; he should also renounce outwardly. Only
then will his teaching bear fruit. Otherwise people will think, \'Though
he asks us to give up \"woman and gold,\" he enjoys them himself in
secret.\'

\"A physician prescribed medicine for a patient. and said to him, \'Come
another day and I\'ll give you directions about diet.\' The physician
had several jars of molasses in his room that day. The patient lived
very far away. He visited the physician later and the physician said to
him: \'Be careful about your food. It is not good for you to eat
molasses.\' After the patient left, another person who was there said to
the physician: \'Why did you give him all the trouble of coming here
again? You could very well have given him the instructions the first
day.\' The physician replied with a smile: There is a reason. I had
several jars of molasses in my room that day. If I had asked the patient
then to give up molasses, he would not have had faith in my words. He
would have thought: \"He has so many jars of molasses in his room, he
must eat some of it. Then molasses can\'t be so bad.\" Today I have
hidden the jars. Now he will have faith in my words.

\"I have seen the Āchārya of the Adi Brahmo Samaj. I understand that he
has married for the second or third time. He has grown-up children. And
such men are teachers! If they say, \'God is real and all else
illusory\', who will believe them? You can very well understand who will
be their disciples.

**Hard rules for a sannyāsi**

\"Like teacher, like disciple. Even if a sannyāsi renounces \'woman and
gold\' mentally, but lives with them outwardly, he cannot be a teacher
of men. People will say that he enjoys \'molasses\' secretly.

\"Once Mahendra Kaviraj of Sinthi gave five rupees to Ramlal. I didn\'t
know about it. When Ramlal told me about the money, I asked him, \'For
whom was the money given?\' He said it was for me. At first I thought
that I should use it to pay what I owed for my milk, But will you
believe me? I had slept only a little while when I suddenly woke up
writhing with pain, as if a cat were scratching my chest. I went to
Ramlal and asked him again, \'Was the money given for your aunt?\'
\'No\', Ramlal answered. Thereupon I said to him, \'Go at once and
return the money.\' Ramlal gave it back the next day.

\"Do you know how it looks for a sannyāsi to accept money or to be
attached to an object of temptation? It is as if a brahmin widow who had
practised continence and lived on simple boiled rice and vegetables and
milk for many years, were suddenly to accept an untouchable as her
paramour. (All look stunned.)

\"There was a low-caste woman named Bhagi Teli in our part of the
country. She had many disciples and devotees. Finding that she, a sudra,
was being saluted by people, the landlord became jealous and engaged a
wicked man to tempt her. He succeeded in corrupting her and all her
spiritual practice came to nothing. A fallen sannyāsi is like that.

\"You are leading householders\' lives. It is necessary for you to live
in the company of holy men. First of all, the company of holy men; then
sraddha, faith in God.

\"How can people have reverence and faith in God if the holy men do not
sing His name and glories? People respect a man if they know that in his
family there have been royal ministers for three generations.

(To M.) \"Even if one has attained Knowledge, one must still constantly
practise God-Consciousness. Nangta used to say: \'What is the use of
polishing the outside of a metal pot one day only? If you don\'t polish
it regularly it will get tarnished again.\' I shall have to go to your
house some time. If I know your house I can meet other devotees there.
Please go to see Ishan some time.

(To Manilal) \"Keshab Sen\'s mother came here the other day. The young
boys of her family sang the name of Hari. She went around them clapping
her hands. I noticed she was not very much stricken with grief over
Keshab\'s death. She observed the fast of ekadasi here and counted her
beads. I was pleased to see her devotion to God.\"

**About Keshab and Vijay**

MANILAL: \"Ramkamal Sen, Keshab Babu\'s grandfather, was a devotee of
God. He used to sit in a tulsi-grove and repeat God\'s holy name.
Pyarimohan, Keshab\'s father, was also a Vaishnava devotee.\"

MASTER: \"The son could not have been so devoted to God if the father
had not been like that. Look at Vijay. His father would become
unconscious of the world in divine ecstasy while reading the Bhagavata.
Vijay can hardly control his emotion: while uttering Hari\'s name, he
sometimes stands up from his seat. The forms of God that Vijay sees
nowadays are all real. Speaking about the different aspects of God,
formless and with form, Vijay said that God sometimes appears with
attributes and sometimes without attributes. He gave the example of the
chameleon, which sometimes turns red, sometimes blue, sometimes green,
and sometimes remains colourless.

**Praise of guilelessness and purity**

\"Vijay is really guileless. One cannot realize God without being
guileless and liberal-minded. Yesterday Vijay was at Adhar Sen\'s house.
He behaved as if it were his own place and those who lived there his own
people. One cannot be guileless and liberal-minded unless one is free
from worldliness.\"

Then the Master sang:

*Gunās*:

You will attain that priceless Treasure when your mind is free from
stain. . . .

He continued: \"You cannot make a pot without first carefully preparing
the clay. The pot will crack if the clay contains particles of sand or
stone. That is why the potter first prepares the clay by removing the
sand and stones.

\"If a mirror is covered with dirt, it won\'t reflect one\'s face. A man
cannot realize his true Self unless his heart is pure. You will find
guilelessness wherever God incarnates Himself as man. Nandaghosh,
Daśaratha, Vasudeva -all of them were guileless.

\"The Vedānta says that a man does not even desire to know God unless he
has a pure mind. One cannot be guileless and liberal-minded without much
*tapasya* or unless it is one\'s last birth.\"

**Master\'s guilelessness**

Sri Ramakrishna was worrying, like a child, because he thought his legs
were slightly swollen. Mahendra Kaviraj of Sinthi entered the room and.
saluted the Master.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Yesterday I said to Naran, \'Just press your
leg and see if there is any dimple.\' He pressed it and there was one.
Then I

gave a sigh of relief. (To Mukherji) Will you please press your leg? Is
there any dimple?\"

MUKHERJI: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Ah, what a relief!\"

MANI MALLICK: \"Why should you worry about it, sir? Please take your
bath in the river. Why should you take medicine?\"

MASTER: \"No, sir. You have strong blood. Your case is different. The
Divine Mother has placed me in the state of a child. One day I was
bitten by something in the jungle. I had heard people say that, in case
of snakebite, the poison would come out if the snake bit again. So I put
my hand in a hole and waited. A man passing by said to me: \'What are
you doing? You will get rid of the poison only if the snake bites again
in the same place. You will not be cured if the snake bites another part
of your body.\'

\"I was told that the autumn dew was good. One day, while coming from
Calcutta, I stuck my head out of the carriage and exposed it to the damp
air. (All laugh.)

(To Mahendra of Sinthi) \"That pundit from Sinthi is very good. He holds
a title for this scholarship. He respects me. I said to him, \'You have
read a great deal; but give up the vanity that you are a scholar.\' That
made him very happy. I discussed Vedānta with him.

**Nature of Brahman**

(To M.): \"That which is Pure Ātman is unattached. Māyā, or avidyā, is
in It. In māyā there are three

sattva, rajas, and tamas. These three *Gunās* also exist in the Pure
Ātman. But Ātman Itself is unattached. If you throw a blue pill into the
fire, you will see a blue flame. If you throw a red pill, you will see a
red flame. But fire itself has no colour of its own.

\"If you put a blue pill in water, the water will turn blue. Again, if
you put alum in that water, it will regain its natural colour.

\"A butcher was carrying a load of meat when he touched Sankara. Sankara
exclaimed: \'What! You have touched me!\' The butcher replied:
\'Venerable sir, neither have you touched me nor have I touched you. You
are pure Ātman, unattached.\' Jadabharata said the same thing to King
Rahugana.

\"The Pure Ātman is unattached, and one cannot see It. If salt is mixed
with water, one cannot see the salt with the eyes.

\"That which is the Pure Ātman is the Great Cause, the Cause of the
cause. The gross, the subtle, the causal, and the Great Cause. The five
elements are gross. Mind, buddhi, and ego are subtle. Prakriti, the
Primal Energy, is the cause of all these. Brahman, Pure Ātman, is the
Cause of the cause.

This Pure Ātman alone is our real nature. What is jnāna? It is to know
one\'s own Self and keep the mind in It.

It is to know the Pure Ātman.

\"How long should a man perform his duties? As long as he identifies
himself with the body, in other words, as long as he thinks he is the
body. That is what the Gitā says. To think of the body as the Ātman is
ajnāna, ignorance.

(To the bearded Brahmo devotee from Shibpur) \"Are you a Brahmo?\"

DEVOTEE: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"I can recognize a worshipper of the Formless by
looking at his face and eyes. Please dive a little deeper. One doesn\'t
get the gem by floating on the surface. As for myself, I accept all-the
formless God and God with form.\"

The Mārwāri devotees from Burrabazar entered the room and saluted the
Master. He began to praise them.

MASTER (to the devotees):\"Ah! They are real devotees of God. They visit
temples, sing hymns to God, and eat prasad. And the gentleman whom they
have made their priest this year is learned in the Bhagavata.\"

MĀRWĀRI DEVOTEE: \"Who is this \'I\' that says, \'O Lord, I am Thy
servant?\' \"

MASTER: \"This is the lingasarira, or embodied soul. It consists of
manas, buddhi, chitta, and Ahamkāra.\"

DEVOTEE: \"Who is the embodied soul?\"

MASTER: \"It is the Ātman bound by the eight fetters. And what is the
chitta? It is the \'I-consciousness\' that says, \'Aha!\'\"

**What happens after death**

DEVOTEE: \"Revered sir, what happens after death?\"

MASTER: \"According to the Gitā, one becomes afterwards what one thinks
of at the time of death. King Bharata thought of his deer and became a
deer in his next life. Therefore one must practise *sādhanā* in order to
realize God. If a man thinks of God day and night, he will have the same
thought in the hour of death.\"

**Māyā hides Knowledge**

DEVOTEE: \"Why don\'t we feel dispassion toward worldly objects?\"

MASTER: \"Because of māyā. Through māyā one feels the Real to be the
unreal and the unreal to be the Real. The Real means That which is
eternal, the Supreme Brahman; and the unreal means that which is
non-eternal, that is to say, the world.\"

DEVOTEE: \"We read the scriptures. Why is it that we can\'t assimilate
them?\"

MASTER: \"What will one accomplish by mere reading? One needs spiritual
practice-austerity. Call on God. What is the use of merely repeating the
word \'siddhi\'? One must eat a little of it.

\'The hand bleeds when it touches a thorny plant. Suppose you bring such
a plant and repeat, sitting near it: \'There! The plant is burning.\'
Will that burn the plant? This world is like the thorny plant. Light the
fire of Knowledge and with it set the plant ablaze. Only then will it be
burnt up.

\"One must labour a little while at the stage of *sādhanā*. Then the
path becomes easy. Steer the boat around the curves of the river and
then let it go with the favourable wind.

\"As long as you live inside the house of māyā, as long as there exists
the cloud of māyā, you do not see the effect of the Sun of Knowledge.
Come outside the house of māyā, give up \'woman and gold\', and then the
Sun of Knowledge will destroy ignorance. A lens cannot burn paper inside
the house. If you stand outside, then the rays of the sun fall on the
lens and the paper burns. Again, the lens cannot burn the paper if there
is a cloud. The paper burns when the cloud disappears.

\"The darkness of the mind is destroyed only when a man stands little
apart from. \'woman and gold\' and, thus standing apart, practises a
little austerity and spiritual discipline. Then only does the cloud of
his ego and ignorance vanish. Then only does he attain the Knowledge of
God. This \'woman and gold\' is the only cloud that hides the Sun of
Knowledge.

**Master\'s renunciation**

(To the Mārwāri devotee) \"The rules for a sannyāsi are extremely hard.
He cannot have the slightest contact with \'woman and gold\'. He must
not accept money with his own hands, and he must not even allow it to be
left near him.

\"Lakshminarayan Mārwāri, a Vedantist, used to come here very often. One
day he saw a dirty sheet on my bed and said: \'I shall invest ten
thousand rupees in your name. The interest will enable you to pay your
expenses.\' The moment he uttered these words, I fell unconscious, as if
struck by a stick. Regaining consciousness I said to him: \'If you utter
such words again, you had better not come here. It is impossible for me
to touch money. It is also impossible for me to keep it near me.\' He
was a very clever fellow. He said: \'Then you too have the idea of
acceptance and rejection. In that case you haven\'t attained Perfect
Knowledge.\' \'My dear sir, I said, \'I haven\'t yet gone that far.\'
(All laugh.) Lakshminarayan then wanted to leave the money with Hriday.
I said to him: \'That will not do. If you leave it with Hriday, then I
shall instruct him to spend it as I wish. If he does not comply, I shall
be angry. The very contact of money is bad. No, you can\'t leave it with
Hriday.\' Won\'t an object kept near a mirror be reflected in it?\"

**Liberation**

DEVOTEE: \"Revered sir, is a man liberated only when he dies on the bank
of the Ganges?\"

MASTER: \"It is the Knowledge of God alone that gives liberation. The
Jnāni will certainly attain liberation wherever he may die, whether in
the charnel-pit or on the bank of the ,Ganges. But the bank of the
Ganges is prescribed for a bound soul.\"

DEVOTEE: \"Revered sir, why does a man dying in Benares become
liberated?\"

MASTER: \"A person dying in Benares sees the vision of Śiva. Śiva says
to him: \'This is My aspect with form, My embodiment in māyā. I assume
this form for the sake of the devotees. Now look. I am merging in the
indivisible Satchidananda!\' Uttering these words, Śiva withdraws His
form and enables the dying person to see Brahman. \"The Puranas say that
even a chandala endowed with love of God achieves liberation. According
to this school the name of God is enough to liberate a soul. There is no
need of such things as worship, sacrifice, the discipline of Tantra, and
the recitation of mantras.

**Path of devotion for Kaliyuga**

\"But the teachings of the Vedas are different. According to the Vedas
none but a brahmin can be liberated. Further, the worship is not
accepted by the gods unless the mantras are recited correctly. One must
perform

sacrifice, worship, and so on, according to scriptural injunction. But
where is the time in the Kaliyuga to perform the Vedic rituals?
Therefore in the Kaliyuga the path of devotion prescribed by Nārada is
best. The path of karma is very difficult. Karma becomes a cause of
bondage unless it is performed in a spirit of detachment. Further, the
life of man nowadays depends on food. He has no time to observe the
rituals enjoined by the scriptures. The patient dies if he tries to cure
his fever by taking the decoction of herbs prescribed by the orthodox
native physicians. Therefore he should take a modern \'fever mixture\'.

\"According to Nārada the devotee should sing the name and glories of
God. The path of karma is not the right one for the Kaliyuga. Bhaktiyoga
is the right path. Do your duties in the world as long as you need them
to reap the fruit of the actions of your past lives. But you must
develop love for God and be passionately attached to Him. The singing of
the name and glories of God destroys the effect of past action.

\"You don\'t have to perform duties all your life. As you develop
unalloyed love and longing for God, your duties become fewer and fewer.
After the realization of God they completely drop away. When the young
daughter-in-law is pregnant, her mother-in-law lessens her duties. After
the birth of the child she doesn\'t have to do any household work.\"

Several young men from the village of Dakshineswar entered the room and
saluted Sri Ramakrishna. It was about four o\'clock in the afternoon.
They sat down and began to talk with the Master.

YOUNG MAN: \"Sir, what is Knowledge?\"

MASTER: \"It is to know that God is the only Reality and that all else
is unreal. That which is the Real is also called Brahman. It has another
name: Kala, Time. There is a saying, \'O brother, how many things come
into being in Time and disappear in Time!\'

\"That whieh sports with Kala is called Kāli. She is the Primal Energy.
Kala and Kāli, Brahman and Śakti, are indivisible.

\"That Brahman, of the nature of Reality, is eternal. It exists in past,
present, and future. It is without beginning or end. It cannot be
described in words. The utmost that can be said of Brahman is that It is
of the very nature of Intelligence and Bliss.

\"The world is illusory; Brahman alone is real. The world is of the
nature of magic. The magician is real but his magic is unreal\"

**Power of inborn tendencies**

YOUNG MAN: \"If the world is of the nature of illusion-magic-then why
doesn\'t one get rid of it?\"

MASTER: \"It is due to the samskaras, inborn tendencies. Repeated births
in this world of māyā make one believe that māyā is real.

\"Let me tell you how powerful inborn tendencies are. A prince had, in a
previous birth, been the son of a washerman. While playing with his
chums in his incarnation as the prince, he said to them: \'Stop those
games. I will show you a new one. I shall lie on my belly, and you will
beat the clothes on my back as the washerman does, making a swishing
sound.\'

\"Many youngsters come here. But only a few long for God. These few are
born with a spiritual tendency. They shudder at the talk of marriage.
Niranjan has said from boyhood that he will not marry.

\"More than twenty years ago two young men used to come here from
Baranagore. One was named Govinda Pal and the other Gopal Sen. They had
been devoted to God since boyhood. The very mention of marriage would
frighten them. Gopal used to have bhava samādhi. He would shrink from
worldly people, as a mouse from a cat. One day he saw the boys of the
Tagore family strolling in the garden. He shut himself in the kuthi

lest he should have to talk with them.

\"Gopal went into samādhi in the Panchavati. In that state he said to
me, touching my feet: \'Let me go. I cannot live in this world any more.
You have a long time to wait. Let me go.\' I said to him, in an ecstatic
mood, \'You must come again.\' \'Very well, I will\', he said. A few
days later Govinda came to me. \'Where is Gopal?\' I asked him. He said,
\'He has passed away.\'

\"What are the other youngsters about? Money, house, carriage, clothes,
and finally marriage. These are the things that keep them busy. If they
want to marry, at the outset they make inquiries about the girl. They
want to find out for themselves whether she is beautiful.

\"There is a person who speaks much ill of me. He is always criticizing
me for loving the youngsters. I love only those who are born with good
tendencies, pure souls with longing for God, who do not pay any
attention to money, creature comforts, and such things.

\"If married people develop love for God, they will not be attached to
the world. Hirananda is married. What if he is? He will not be much
attached to the world.\"

Hirananda, a member of the Brahmo Samaj, was a native of Sindh. He had
met the Master in Calcutta and become devoted to him.

Manilal, the Mārwāri devotees, the Brahmo devotees from Shibpur, and the
young men from Dakshineswar saluted Sri Ramakrishna and took their
leave.

It was evening. Lamps were lighted on the south and west verandahs. A
lamp was lighted in the Master\'s room also, and incense was burnt. He
was repeating the name of the Divine Mother, absorbed in contemplation
of Her. After a while he talked again to the devotees. There was still
some time before the evening worship in the temples.

MASTER (to M.): \"What need of the sandhya has a man who thinks of God
day and night?

> *What need of rituals has a man, what need of devotions any more,*
>
> *If he repeats the Mother\'s name at the three holy hours?*
>
> *Rituals may pursue him close, but never can they overtake him.*
>
> *Charity, vows, and giving of gifts do not appeal to Madan\'s mind;*
>
> *The Blissful Mother\'s Lotus Feet are his whole prayer and
> sacrifice.*

\"The sandhya merges in the Gayatri, the Gayatri in Om. A man is firmly
established in spiritual life when he goes into samādhi on uttering
\'Om\' only once.

\"There is a sādhu in Hrishikesh who gets up early in the morning and
stands near a great waterfall. He looks at it the whole day and says to
God: \'Ah, You have done well! Well done! How amazing! He doesn\'t
practise any other form of japa or austerity. At night he returns to his
hut.

\"What need is there even to bother one\'s head about whether God is
formless or has a form? It is enough for a man to pray to Him, alone in
solitude, weeping, \'O God, reveal Yourself to me as You are.\'

\"God is both inside and outside. It is He who dwells inside us.
Therefore the Vedas say, \'Tattvamasi-That thou art.\' God is also
outside us. He appears manifold through māyā; but in reality He alone
exists. Therefore before describing the various names and forms of God,
one should say, \'Om Tat Sat.\'

\"It is one thing to learn about God from the scriptures, and quite
another to see Him. The scriptures only give hints. Therefore to read a
great many scriptures is not necessary. It is much better to pray to God
in solitude.

\"It isn\'t necessary to read all of the Gitā. One can get the essence
of the Gitā by repeating the word ten times.

It becomes reversed and is then \'tagi\'. The essence of the book is:
\'O man, renounce everything and worship God.\'\"

The Master went into an ecstatic mood while watching the evening worship
of Kāli in the company of the devotees. He was in no condition even to
salute the image. Very carefully he returned to his room with the
devotees and sat down; he was still in an ecstatic mood. He spoke to
them while in that state.

In the room was Hari, a young man about twenty years of age, who was a
relative of the Mukherjis and very much devoted to the Master. He was
married. At that time he was living with the Mukherjis and looking for a
job.

MASTER (to Hari, in an ecstatic mood): \"Take your initiation after
getting your mother\'s permission. (To Priya, referring to Hari) I
couldn\'t give him the mantra though I said I would initiate him. I
don\'t initiate people. Continue with your own meditation and japa as
you have been doing.\"

PRIYA: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"And I am saying this to you in this state of my mind. Believe
my words. You see, there is no show or deceit here. I just said to the
Divine Mother in my ecstatic mood, \'O Mother, may those who come here
\[referring to himself\] through sincere attraction obtain perfection!\'
\"

Mahendra Kaviraj of Sinthi was seated on the verandah conversing with
Ramlal, Hazra, and others. The Master called to him from his room. M.
went out quickly and brought Mahendra in.

MASTER (to Mahendra): \"Sit down and listen to my words.\"

Mahendra was a little embarrassed. He sat down.

**Various forms of divine love**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"God can be served in different ways. An
ecstatic lover of God enjoys Him in different ways. Sometimes he says,
\'O God, You are the lotus and I am the bee\', and sometimes, \'You are
the Ocean of Satchidananda and I am the fish.\' Sometimes, again, the
lover of God says, \'I am Your dancing-girl.\' He dances and sings
before Him. He thinks of himself sometimes as the friend of God and
sometimes as His handmaid. He looks on God sometimes as a child, as did
Yaśoda, and sometimes as husband or sweetheart, as did the gopis.

\"Sometimes Balarama looked on Krishna as a friend; sometimes he would
think he was Krishna\'s umbrella or carpet. He served Krishna in all
possible ways.\"

Was Sri Ramakrishna hinting at his own state of mind while thus
describing the different attitudes of a lover of God?

**Chaitanya\'s spiritual moods**

Next he described Chaitanya\'s three spiritual moods.

MASTER: \"Chaitanyadeva used to experience three moods. In the inmost
mood he would be absorbed in samādhi, unconscious of the outer world. In
the semi-conscious mood he would dance in ecstasy but could not talk. In
the conscious mood he would sing the glories of God.

(To the devotees) \"You are listening to my words. Try to assimilate
them. When worldly people sit before a sādhu, for the time being they
completely hide all worldly thoughts and ideas. But once away from the
holy man they let them out again. You have seen a pigeon eating dried
peas. You think he has digested them, but he keeps them in his crop. You
can feel them there.

\"At dusk put aside all duties and pray to God. One is reminded of Him
by darkness. At the approach of

darkness one thinks: \'I could see everything a moment ago. Who has
brought about this change?\' The Mussalmans put aside all activities and
say their prayers at the appointed times.\"

**Practice of japa**

MUKHERJI: \"Revered sir, is it good to practise japa?\"

MASTER: \"Yes. One attains God through japa. By repeating the name of
God secretly and in solitude one receives divine grace. Then comes His
vision. Suppose there is a big piece of timber lying under water and
fastened to the land with a chain; by proceeding along the chain, link
by link, you will at last touch the timber.

\"Higher than worship is japa, higher than japa is meditation, higher
than meditation is bhava, and higher than bhava are mahabhava and prema.
Chaitanyadeva had prema, When one attains prema one has the rope to tie
God.\"

Hazra entered the room.

MASTER (to Hazra): \"Love of God, when it is intense and spontaneous, is
called raga-bhakti. Vaidhi-bhakti, formal devotion, depends on
scriptural injunctions. It comes and it goes. But raga-bhakti is like a
stone emblem of Śiva that has sprung up out of the bowels of the earth.
One cannot find its root; they say the root goes as far as Benares. Only
an Incarnation of God and His companions attain raga-bhakti.\"

HAZRA: \"Ah me!\"

MASTER: \"One day I was returning from the Pine-grove, when I saw you
telling your beads. I said to the Divine Mother: \'Mother, what a small
minded fellow he is! He lives here and still he pratises japa with a
rosary! Whoever comes he \[referring to himself\] will have his
spiritual consciousness awakened all a once; he won\'t have to bother
much, about japa. Go to Calcutta and you will find thousands telling
their beads-even the prostitutes.\'

(To M.) \"Please bring Naran here in a carriage. I am making the same
request to Mukherji. I shall give Naran something to eat when he comes.
There is great significance in feeding boys like him.\"

**Saturday, October 4, 1884**

It was the day of the first full moon after the Durga Puja. Sri
Ramakrishna arrived at the Calcutta house of Nabin Sen, the elder
brother of Keshab Chandra Sen. On the previous Thursday Keshab\'s mother
had begged the Master to pay her a visit in Calcutta.

The Master seated himself in a room on the upper floor of the house.
With him were Baburam, Kishori, and a few other devotees. Nandalal and
Keshab\'s other nephews, Keshab\'s mother, and other relatives of his,
waited on the Master. It had been arranged to have devotional music
performed in the room. M. was sitting in a room downstairs, listening to
the kirtan.

**Master with Brahmo devotees**

Sri Ramakrishna said to the Brahmo devotees: \"The world is
impermanent.One should constantly remember death.\" Then he sang:

> *Remember this, O mind! Nobody is your own:*
>
> *Vain is your wandering in this world.*
>
> *Trapped in the subtle snare of māyā as you are,*
>
> *Do not forget the Mother\'s name. . . .*

The Master said to the devotees: \"Dive deep. What will you gain by
merely floating on the surface? Renounce everything for a few days,
retire into solitude, and call on God with all your soul\"

The Master sang:

> *Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in. the Ocean of God\'s Beauty; If you
> descend to the uttermost depths, There you will find the gem of Love.
> . . .*

At Sri Ramakrishna\'s request the Brahmo devotees sang:

> *Thou art my All in All, O Lord!- the Life of my life, the Essence of
> essence;*
>
> *In the three worlds I have none else but Thee to call my own.*
>
> *Thou art my peace, my joy, my hope;*
>
> *Thou my support, my wealth, my glory;*
>
> *Thou my wisdom and my strength. . . .*

The Master sang again:

> *O Mother, for Yaśoda Thou wouldst dance, when she called*
>
> *Thee her precious \"Blue Jewel\":*
>
> *Where hast Thou hidden that lovely form, O terrible Syama? . . .*

The Brahmo devotees also sang to theaccompaniment of cymbals and drums:

> *O Mother, how deep is Thy love for men!*
>
> *Mindful of it, I weep for joy.*
>
> *Almost from the day of my birth*
>
> *I have transgressed Thine every law,*
>
> *And still Thou lookest on me with love,*
>
> *Comforting me with sweetest words.*
>
> *Mindful of it, I weep for joy.*
>
> *O Mother, the burden of Thy love*
>
> *Is far too great for me to bear;*
>
> *My soul gives a heart-piercing cry*
>
> *At Thy love\'s touch. To Thee I come,*
>
> *Seeking a refuge at Thy feet.*

They again sang of the Divine Mother:

> *O Mother, Thou my Inner Guide, ever awake within my heart!*
>
> *Day and night Thou holdest me in Thy lap.*
>
> *Why dost Thou show such tenderness to this unworthy child of
> Thine\'?*
>
> *Ah! It seems Thou art mad with love: now caressing, now with strong
> grasp*
>
> *Holding me firm, Thou givest me to drink*
>
> *Thy nectar, pouring in my ears Thy words of loving tenderness.*
>
> *Unceasing is Thy love for me, a love that cannot see my faults ;*
>
> *Whenever I am in danger, Thou dost save me.*
>
> *Saviour of sinners! I know the truth: I am my Mother\'s and She is
> mine.*
>
> *Now I shall listen to Her alone, and follow the path of
> righteousness;*
>
> *Drinking the milk that flows from my Mother\'s breasts,*
>
> *I shall be strong and sing with joy: \"Hail, O Mother! Brahman
> Eternal!\"*

The Master and the Brahmo devotees sang several songs about Hari and
Gaurānga.

**Sunday, October 5, 1884**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room after the midday meal, with M.,
Hazra, the elder Kāli, Baburam, Ramlal, Hari, and others. Some of them
sat on the floor and some stood about. On the previous day the Master
had visited Keshab\'s mother at her Calcutta house and had made her
happy with his devotional songs.

**Hazra\'s eccentricities**

Hazra had been living with the Master at Dakshineswar a long time. He
was a little conceited about his knowledge and even criticized the
Master now and then before others. Again, he would sit on the verandah
of the Master\'s room and tell his beads with apparent concentration. He
spoke slightingly of Chaitanya as a \"modern Incarnation\". He would
say: \"God gives not only pure devotion but also wealth. He has no lack
of it. By attaining God one obtains the eight occult powers as well.\"
Hazra had a small debt to clear up, about one thousand rupees. He had
incurred it for the building of his house and was worried about paying
it.

The elder Kāli had a position in an office, from which he received a
small salary. He had a large family to maintain. He was devoted to the
Master and visited him now and then, even absenting himself from the
office.

KALl (to Hazra): \"You go about criticizing people; you are like a
touchstone, testing what is pure gold and what is impure. Why do you
speak so much ill of others?\" HAZRA: \"Whatever I say, I say to him
\[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\] alone.\"

MASTER: \"That is so.\"

Hazra began to explain Tattvajnana.

HAZRA: \"The meaning of Tattvajnana is the knowledge of the existence of
the twenty-four tattvas, or cosmic principles.\"

He was wrong about the meaning of the word.

A DEVOTEE: \"What are they?\"

HAZRA: \"The five elements, the six passions, the five organs of
perception, the five organs of action, and so forth.\"

M. (to the Master, smiling): \"He says that the six passions are
included in the twenty-four cosmic principles.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Listen to him! Notice how he explains Tattvajnana!
The word really means \'knowledge of Self\'. The word \'Tat\' means the
Supreme Self, and the word \'tvam\', the embodied soul. One attains
Supreme Knowledge, Tattvajnana, by realizing the identity of the
embodied soul and the Supreme Self.\"

After a few minutes Hazra left the room and sat on the porch.

MASTER(to M. and the others): \"He \[meaning Hazra\] only argues. This
moment perhaps he understands, but the next moment he is his old self
again.

\"When the angler hooks a big fish and finds it pulling hard, he
releases the line; otherwise it will snap and the angler himself will be
thrown into the water. Therefore I do not say much to him.

(To M.) \"Hazra said that a man could not be liberated unless he was
born in a brahmin body. \'How is that?\' I said. \'One attains
liberation through bhakti alone. Savari was the daughter of a hunter.
She, Ruhidas, and others belonged to the sudra caste. They were
liberated through bhakti alone.\' \'But still-Hazra insisted.

\"He recognized Dhruva\'s spiritual greatness, but not as much as he
recognized Prahlada\'s. When Lātu said, \'Dhruva had great yearning for
God from his boyhood\', he kept still.

\"I said that there was nothing greater than the bhakti that sought no
end and had no selfish motive. Hazra contradicted me. I said to him, \'A
wealthy man is annoyed when a petitioner comes to him. \"There he
comes\", he says angrily. \"Sit down\", he says to him in an indifferent
voice, and shows that he is much annoyed. He doesn\'t allow such a
beggar to ride with him in his carriage.\'

\"But Hazra said that God was not like such wealthy people of the world;
did He lack wealth, that He should feel pinched to give it away? Hazra
said further: \'When rain falls from the sky, the Ganges and all the big
rivers and lakes overflow with water. Small tanks, too, are filled.
Likewise, God out of His grace grants wealth and riches as well as
knowledge and devotion.\'

(To the devotees) \"But I call this impure devotion to God. Pure
devotion has no desire behind it. You don\'t want anything from me, but
you love to see me and hear my words. My mind also dwells on you. I
wonder how you are and why you don\'t come.

\"You don\'t want anything of God but still you love Him. That is pure
bhakti, love of God with no motive behind it. Prahlada had it. He sought
neither kingdom nor riches; he sought Hari alone.\"

M: \"Hazra is a chatterbox. He won\'t achieve anything unless he becomes
silent.\"

MASTER: \"Now and then he comes to me and becomes mellowed. But he is a
pest; again he argues. It is very hard to get rid of egotism. You may
cut down an Aśwattha tree, but the next day a sprout will spring up. As
long as the roots remain, the tree will grow again.

\"I said to Hazra, \'Don\'t speak ill of anyone.\' It is Narayana
Himself who has assumed all these forms. One can worship even a wicked
person. Haven\'t you observed the Kumari Puja? Why should you worship a
girl who has all the physical limitations of a human being? It is
because she is a form of the Divine Mother. But God dwells in a special
way in His devotee. The devotee is His parlour. If the gourd has a large
body then it makes a good Tānpura. It gives a nice sound.\"

Two monks had arrived at the temple garden in the morning. They were
devoted to the study of the Bhagavad Gitā, the Vedānta, and other
scriptures. They entered the Master\'s room, saluted him, and sat on the
mat on the floor. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the small couch. The
Master spoke to the sādhus in Hindusthani.

MASTER: \"Have you had your meal?\"

SĀDHU: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"What did you eat?\"

SĀDHU: \"Dal and bread. Will you take some?\"

MASTER: \"No, I take only a few morsels of rice. Well, your japa and
meditation must be without any desire for results. Isn\'t that so?\"

SĀDHU: \"Yes, Sir.\"

MASTER: \"That is good. One must surrender the result to God. What do
you say? That is the view of the Gitā.\"

One sādhu said to the other, quoting from the Gitā: \"O Arjuna, whatever
action you perform, whatever you eat, whatever you offer in sacrifice,
whatever you give in charity, and whatever austerities you practise,
offer everything to Me.\"

MASTER: \"If you give God something, you receive it back a thousand
times over. That is why after doing meritorious deeds one offers a
handful of water to God. It is the symbol of offering the fruit to God.
When Yudhisthira was about to offer all his sins to Krishna, Bhima
warned him: \'Never do such a thing. Whatever you

> offer to Krishna you will receive back a thousandfold.\'
>
> (To one of the sādhus) \"Well, sir, one should be de- sireless; one
> should renounce all desires. Isn\'t that so?\"
>
> SĀDHU: \"Yes, sir.\"
>
> MASTER: \"But I have the desire for bhakti. That is not bad. Rather,
> it is good. Sweets are bad, for they produce acidity. But sugar candy
> is an exception. Isn\'t that so?\"
>
> SĀDHU: \"Yes, sir.\"
>
> MASTER: \"Well, sir, what do you think of the Vedānta?\"
>
> SĀDHU: \"It includes all the six systems of philosophy.\"
>
> MASTER: \"But the essence of Vedānta is: \'Brahman alone is real, and
> the world illusory; I have no separate existence; I am that Brahman
> alone.\' Isn\'t that so?\"
>
> SĀDHU: \"That is true, sir.\"
>
> MASTER: \"But for those who lead a householder\'s life, and those who
> identify themselves with the body, this attitude of \'I am He\' is not
> good. It is not good for householders to read Vedānta or the
> Yoga-vāsishta. It is very harmful for them to read these books.
> Householders should look on God as their Master and on themselves as
> His servants. They should think, \'O God, You are the Master and the
> Lord, and I am Your servant.\' People who identify themselves with the
> body should not have the attitude of \'I am He\'.\"
>
> The devotees in the room remained silent. Sri Ramakrishna was smiling
> a little, a picture of self-contentment.
>
> He appeared happy in his own Self.
>
> One of the sādhus whispered in the other\'s ear: \"Look! This is the
> state of the paramahamsa.\"
>
> MASTER (to M.): \"I feel like laughing.\"
>
> Sri Ramakrishna smiled like a child. The monks left the room. The
> devotees were moving about in the room and on the porch.
>
> Master ( to M.) :\"Did you go to Nabin Sen\'s house?\"
>
> M:\"Yes, sir. I listened to the songs from down stairs.\"
>
> MASTER: \"That was well done. Your wife was there. She is a cousin of
> Keshab Sen, isn\'t she?\"
>
> M: \"A distant cousin.\"
>
> Sri Ramakrishna strolled up and down with M. No one else was with
> them.
>
> MASTER: \"A man visits his father-in-law\'s house. I, too, often used
> to think that I should marry, go to my father-in-law\'s house, and
> have great fun. But see what has come of it!\"

1.  \"Sir, you say, \'If the boy holds his father\'s hand, he may slip;
    but he doesn\'t if the father holds his hand.\' That is exactly your
    condition. The Mother has taken hold of your hand.\"

> MASTER: \"I met Bamandas at the Viswases\' house. I said to him, \'I
> have come to see you.\' As I was leaving the place I heard him say:
> \'Goodness gracious! The Divine Mother has caught hold of him, like a
> tiger seizing a man.\' At that time I was a young man, very stout, and
> always in ecstasy.

**Master\'s attitude toward women**

\"I am very much afraid of women. When I look at one I feel as if a
tigress were coming to devour me. Besides, I find that their bodies,
their limbs, and even their pores are very large. This makes me look
upon them as she-monsters. I used to be much more afraid of women than I
am at present. I wouldn\'t allow one to come near me. Now I persuade my
mind in various ways to look upon women as forms of the Blissful Mother.

\"A woman is, no doubt, a part of the Divine Mother. But as far as a man
is concerned, especially a sannyāsi or a devotee of God, she is to be
shunned. I don\'t allow a woman to sit near me very long, no matter how
great her devotion may be. After a little while I say to her, \'Go and
see the temples.\'

If that doesn\'t make her move, I myself leave the room on the pretext
of smoking.

\"I find that some men are not at all interested in women. Niranjan
says, \'A woman never enters my thought.\' I asked Hari about it. He too
says that his mind does not dwell on woman.

\"Woman monopolizes three quarters of the mind, which should be given to
God. And then, after the birth of a child, almost the whole mind is
frittered away on the family. Then what is left to give to God?

\"Again, there are some men who shed their last drop of blood, as it
were, to keep their wives out of mischief. There is the gate-keeper, an
old man, whose wife is only fourteen years old. She had to live with
him. They lived in a thatched hut with walls made of dry leaves. People
made holes in the wall to peep in. Now she has left him and run away.

\"I know another man. He doesn\'t know where to keep his wife. There was
some trouble at home, and now he is greatly worried. Let\'s not talk
about these things any more.

\"If a man lives with a woman, he cannot help coming under her control.
Worldly men get up and sit down at the bidding of women. They all speak
highly of their wives.

\"Once I wanted to go to a certain place. I asked Ramlal\'s aunt about
it. She forbade me to go; so I could not. A little while later I said to
myself: \'I am not a householder. I have renounced \"woman and gold\".
If, in spite of that, this is my plight, one can well imagine how much
worldly people are controlled by their wives.\'\"

1.  \"One who lives in the midst of \'woman and gold\' can\'t help being
    stained by it, even if only slightly. You told us about Jaynarayan.
    He was such a great scholar. When you visited him he was an old man.
    You found him warming pillows and blankets in the sun.\"

MASTER: \"But he had no vanity of scholarship. Further, what he said
about the last days of his life came to pass. He spent them in Benares,
following the injunctions of the scriptures. I saw his children. They
were wearing high boots and had been educated in English schools.\"

By means of questions and answers Sri Ramakrishna now explained to M.
his own exalted state.

MASTER: \"At first I went stark mad. Why am I less so now? But I get
into that state now and then.\"

1.  \"You don\'t have just one mood. As you said, you experience various
    moods. Sometimes you are like a child, sometimes like a madman,
    sometimes like an inert thing, and sometimes like a ghoul. And now
    and then you are a natural person.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, like a child. But I also experience the moods of a boy
and a young man. When I give instruction I feel like a young man. Then
there is my boyishness: like a boy twelve or thirteen years old, I want
to be frivolous. That is why I joke and make merry with the youngsters.

\"What do you think of Naran?\"

M: \"He has good traits, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, the shell of the gourd is good. The Tānpura made out of
it will give good music. He says to me, \'You are everything.\' Everyone
speaks of me according to his comprehension. Some say that I am simply a
sādhu, a devotee of God.

\"If I forbid Naran to do something, he understands it very well. The
other day I asked him to pull up the curtain, but he didn\'t do it. I
had forbidden him to tie a knot, to sew his clothes, to lock a box, to
pull up a curtain, and similar things. He understood it all. He who
would renounce the world must practise all these disciplines. They are
meant for sannyāsis.

\"While practising *sādhanā* a man should regard a woman as a raging
forest fire or a black cobra. But in the state of perfection, after the
realization of God, she appears as the Blissful Mother. Then you will
look on her as a form of the Divine Mother.\"

A few days earlier Sri Ramakrishna had spoken many words of warning to
Narayan about women. He had said: \"Don\'t let yourself touch the air
near a woman\'s body. Cover yourself with a heavy sheet lest the air
should touch your body. And keep yourself eight cubits, two cubits, or
at least one cubit away from all women except your mother.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"Naran\'s mother said to him about me, \'Even we are
enchanted by the sight of him, not to speak of you, a mere child.\' None
but the guileless can realize God. How guileless Niranjan is!\"

M: \"True, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Didn\'t you notice him that day in the carriage on the way to
Calcutta? He is always the same-without guile. A man shows one side of
his nature inside his house and another to the outside world. Since his
father\'s death Narendra has been worried about his worldly affairs. He
has a slightly calculating mind. How I wish that other youngsters were
like Niranjan and Narendra!

\"Today I went to the village to see Nilkantha\'s theatrical
performance. It was given at Nabin Niyogi\'s house. The children there
are very bad; they have nothing to do but find fault. In such a place a
person\'s spiritual feeling is restrained. During a performance the
other day I saw Doctor Madhu shedding tears. I looked at him alone.

(To M.) \"Can you tell me why people feel so much attracted to this
place \[meaning himself\]? What does it mean?\"

1.  \"It reminds me of an episode in Krishna\'s life at Vrindāvan.
    Krishna transformed Himself into the cowherd boys and the calves,
    whereupon the cows began to feel more strongly attracted to the
    cowherd boys, the gopis, and the calves.\"

MASTER: \"That is the attraction of God. The truth is, the Divine Mother
creates the spell and it is that which attracts people.

\"Well, not as many people come here as used to go to Keshab Sen. And
how many people respect and honour Keshab! He is known even in England.
Queen Victoria spoke with him. It is said in the Gitā that God\'s power
is manifest in him who is honoured and respected by many. But so many
people do not come here.\"

1.  \"It was the householders who went to Keshab Sen.\" MASTER: \"Yes,
    that is true. The worldly-minded.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"Will what Keshab has founded remain a long time?\"

MASTER: \"Why, he has written a samhita, a book of rules for the
guidance of the members of his Brahmo Samaj.\"

1.  \"But it is quite different with the work done by a Divine
    Incarnation Himself-Chaitanya\'s work, for instance.\" MASTER:
    \"Yes, yes. That is true.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"You yourself tell us that Chaitanyadeva said, \'The seeds I have
    sown will certainly bear fruit some time or other.\' A man left some
    seeds on the cornice of a house. Later on the house fell down and
    trees grew from those seeds.\"

MASTER: \"Many people go to the Samaj founded by Shivanath and friends.
Isn\'t that so?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. People of that sort.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, yes. The worldly-minded go there, but not many
of those who long for God and are trying to renounce \'woman and
gold\'.\"

1.  \"It will be fine if a current flows from this place. Everything
    will be carried away by its force. Nothing that comes out of this
    place will be monotonous.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"I keep men\'s own ideals intact. I ask a Vaishnava
to hold to his Vaishnava attitude and a Sakta to his. But this also I
say to them \'Never feel that your path alone is right and that the
paths of others a wrong and full of errors. Hindus, Mussalmans, and
Christians are going to the same destination by different paths. A man
can realize God by following his own path if his prayer is sincere.

\"Vijay\'s mother-in-law said to me, \'Why don\'t you tell Balarām that
it unnecessary to worship God with form; that it will be enough if he
prays to the formless Satchidananda?\' I replied, \'Why should I say
such a thing, and why should he listen to me even if I should say it?\'
\"

1.  \"That is true, sir. There are different paths to suit time, place,
    and the fitness of the candidate. Whatever path a man may follow, he
    will ultimately reach God if he is pure of heart and has sincere
    longing. That is what you say.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his room. Hari, the relative of the
Mukherjis, M., and other devotees were on the floor. An unknown person
saluted the Master and took a seat. The Master remarked later that his
eyes were not good. They were yellow, like a cat\'s.

Hari prepared a smoke for Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER (to Hari): \"Let me see the palm of your hand. This mark is good
sign. Relax your hand.\"

He took Hari\'s hand into his as if to feel its weight.

MASTER: \"He is still childlike. As yet there is no blemish in him. (To
the devotees) From the hand I can tell whether a person is deceitful or
guileless. (To Hari) Why, you should go to your father-in-law\'s house.
You should talk to your wife and have a little fun with her if you like.
(To M.) What do you say?\" (M. and the others laugh.)

1.  \"If a new pot becomes bad, one can no longer keep milk in it.\"
    MASTER (smiling): \"How do you know that it is not already bad?\"

The two Mukherjis, Mahendra and Priyanath, were brothers. They did not
work in an office, but had their own flour-mill. Priyanath had been an
engineer. Sri Ramakrishna talked to Hari about the Mukherji brothers.

MASTER: \"The elder brother is nice, isn\'t he? He is artless.\"

HARI: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Isn\'t the younger brother very miserly? I understand that
since coming here he has improved a great deal. He once said to me, \'I
didn\'t know anything before.\' (To Hari) Do they give anything in
charity?\"

HARI: \"Not much, as far as I can see. Their elder brother, now dead,
was a very good man. He was very charitable.\"

**Physical signs indicating character**

MASTER (to M. and the others): \"Whether a person will make spiritual
progress or not can be known to a great extent by his physical marks.
The hand of a deceitful person is heavy. A snub nose is not a good sign.
Sambhu had that kind of nose; hence he was not quite sincere in spite of
all his wisdom. Pigeon-breast is not a good sign either. Hard bones and
heavy elbow-joints are bad signs too; and yellow eyes, like a cat\'s.

\"A man becomes very mean if he has lips that are thick, like a dome\'s.
A brahmin was here for a few months acting as priest of the Vishnu
temple. I couldn\'t eat the food he touched. One day I suddenly
exclaimed, \'He is a dome!\' Afterwards he said to me: \'Yes, sir. We
live in the dome quarters. I know how to make wicker baskets and such
things, Just like a dome.\'

\"There are other bad physical signs: one eye and squint eyes. It is
rather better to have one eye, but never squint eyes. Squint-eyed people
are wicked and deceitful.

\"A student of Mahesh Nyayaratna\'s came here. He described himself as
an atheist. He said to Hriday: \'I am an atheist. You may take up the
position of a believer in God and argue with me.\' Thereupon I watched
him closely and noticed that his eyes were yellow, like a cat\'s.

\"Whether a person is good or bad can also be known from the way he
walks.\"

Sri Ramakrishna paced the verandah. M. and Baburam walked with him.

MASTER (to Hazra): \"A man came here. I saw that his eyes were like a
cat\'s. He asked me: \'Do you know

astrology? I am in some difficulty.\' I said: \'No, I don\'t. Go to
Baranagore. There you will find astrologers.\'\"

**Master and Nilkantha**

Baburam and M. talked about Nilkantha\'s theatrical performance. Baburam
had spent the previous night at the temple garden after his return from
Nabin Sen\'s house. In the morning he had attended Nilkantha\'s
performance with the Master.

MASTER (to M. and Baburam): \"What are you talking about?\"

M. AND BABURAM: \"About Nilkantha\'s performance.\"

While pacing the verandah Sri Ramakrishna suddenly took M. aside and
said, \"The less people know about your thoughts of God, the better for
You,\" Saying these words the Master abruptly went away. A short time
afterwards he began to talk with Hazra.

HAZRA: \"Nilkantha told you he would pay you a visit. It would be good
send for him.\"

MASTER: \"No, he didn\'t sleep at all last night. It will be different
if he comes here through the will of God.\"

Sri Ramakrishna asked Baburam to visit Narayan at his house. He looked
on Narayan as God Himself, and so he longed to see him. The Master said
to Baburam, \"You may go to him with one of your English text-books.\"

About three o\'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in his
room. Nilkantha arrived with five or six of his companions. The Master
went toward the east door as if to welcome him. The musicians bowed
before the Master, touching the ground with their foreheads.

Sri Ramakrishna went into samādhi. Baburam stood behind him. M.,
Nilkantha, and the musicians were in front of him, watching him in great
amazement. Dinanath, an officer of the temple, looked on from the north
side of the bed. Soon the room was filled with officers of the temple
garden. Sri Ramakrishna\'s ecstasy abated a little. He seated himself on
a mat on the floor, surrounded by Nilkantha and other devotees.

MASTER (still in an ecstatic mood): \"I am all right.\"

NILKANTHA (with folded hands): \"Make me all right too.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Why, you are already all right. Adding the letter to
\'a\', one gets \'ka\'. By adding another \'a\' to \'ka\', one still
gets the same \'ka\'.\" (All laugh.)

NILKANTHA: \"Revered sir, I am entangled in worldliness.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"God has kept you in the world for the sake of
others. There are eight fetters. One cannot get rid of them all. God
keeps one or two so that a man may live in the world and teach others.
You have organized this theatrical company. How many people are being
benefited by seeing your bhakti! If you give up everything, then where
will these musicians go?

\"God is now doing all these works through you. When they are finish,
you will not return to them. The housewife finishes her household duties
feeds everyone, including the menservants and maidservants, and then
goes to take her bath. She doesn\'t come back then even if people shout
for her.\"

NILKANTHA: \"Please bless me.\"

MASTER: \"Yaśoda went mad with grief because she was separated from
Krishna. She went to Radhika, who

was meditating. Radhika said to her an ecstatic state: \'I am the
Ultimate Prakriti, the Primal Power. Ask a boon of Me.\' Yaśoda said to
her: \'What shall I ask of You? Please bless me, that with all my body,
mind, and speech I may think of God and serve Him; that with my ears I
may hear the singing of God\'s name and glories; that with my hands I
may serve Hari and His devotees; that with my eyes I may behold His form
and His devotees.\'

\"Your eyes fill with tears when you utter the name of God. Why then
should you worry about anything? Divine love has grown in you.

\"To know many things is ajnāna, ignorance. To know only one thing is
jnāna, Knowledge-the realization that God alone is real and that He
dwells in all. And to talk to Him is vijnāna, a fuller Knowledge. To
love God in different ways, after realizing Him, is vijnāna.

\"It is also said that God is beyond one and two. He is beyond speech
and mind. To go up from the Lila to the Nitya and come down again from
the Nitya to the Lila is mature bhakti.

\"I love that song of yours about aspiring to reach the Lotus Feet of
the Divine Mother. It is enough to know that everything depends on the
grace of God. But one must pray to God; it will not do to remain
inactive. The lawyer gives all the arguments and finishes his pleading
by saying to the judge: \'I have said all I have to say. Now the
decision rests with Your Honour.\' \"

After a few minutes Sri Ramakrishna said to Nilkantha: \"You sang so
much in the morning, and now you have taken the trouble to come here.
But here everything is \'honorary\'.\"

NILKANTHA: \"Why so?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"I know what you will say.\"

NILKANTHA: \"I shall get a precious gem from here.\"

MASTER: \"You already have that precious gem. What will you gain by
adding again the letter \'a\' to \'ka\'? If you didn\'t have the gem,
should I like your songs so much?

Ramprasad had attained divine realization; that is why his songs appeal
so much.

\"I had already planned to hear your music. Later on Niyogi, too, came
here to invite me.\"

The Master was sitting on the small couch. He told Nilkantha that he
would like to hear a song or two about the Divine Mother.

Nilkantha sang two songs with his companions. When the Master heard the
second song he stood up and went into samādhi. Presently he began to
dance in an ecstasy of divine love. Nilkantha and the devotees sang and
danced around him. Then Nilkantha sang a song about Śiva, and the Master
danced with the devotees.

When the singing was over, Sri Ramakrishna said to Nilkantha, \"I should
like to hear that song of yours I heard in Calcutta.\"

1.  \"About Sri Gaurānga?\" MASTER: \"Yes, yes!\"

Nilkantha sang the song, \"The beautiful Gaurānga, the youthful dancer,
fair as molten gold.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sang again and again the line, \"Everything is swept
away by the onrush of love\", and danced with Nilkantha and the other
devotees. Those who saw that indescribable dancing were never to forget
it. The room was filled with people, all intoxicated with divine joy. It
seemed as if Chaitanya himself were dancing with his companions.

Manomohan was in an ecstatic mood. He was a devotee of Sri Ramakrishna
and a brother-in-law of Rākhāl . Several ladies of his family had come
with him. They were witnessing this divine music and dancing from the
north verandah.

Sri Ramakrishna sang again, this time about Gaurānga and Nityananda:

Behold, the two brothers have came, who weep while chanting Hari\'s
name. . . .

He danced with Nilkantha and the other devotees, improvising the line:

Behold, the two brothers have come, they who are mad with love of Radha.

Hearing the loud music, many people gathered about the room. The
verandahs to the south and north, and the semicircular porch to the west
of the room, were crowded with people. Even passengers in the boats
going along the Gauges were attracted by the kirtan.

The music was over Sri Ramakrishna bowed to the Divine Mother and said,
\"Bhagavata-Bhakta-Bhagavan. My salutations to the jnanis, my
salutations to the yogis, my salutations to the bhaktas.\"

The Master was seated on the semicircular porch with Nilkantha and the
other devotees. The autumn moon flooded all the quarters with light. Sri
Ramakrishna and Nilkantha talked.

NILKANTHA: \"You are none other than Gaurānga.\"

MASTER: \"Why should you say such a thing? I am the servant of .the
servant of all. The waves belong to the

Ganges; but does the Ganges belong to the waves?\"

NILKANTHA: \"You may say whatever you like, but we regard you as
Gaurānga himself.\"

MASTER (tenderly, in an ecstatic mood): \"My dear sir, I try to seek my
\'I\', but I do not find it. Hanuman said: \'O Rāma, sometimes I think
that You are the whole and I am a part, and sometimes that You are the
Master and I am Your servant. But when I have the Knowledge of Reality,
I see that You are I and I am You.\'\"

NILKANTHA: \"What shall I say, sir? Please be gracious to us.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"You are ferrying many people across the ocean or the
world. How many hearts are illumined by hearing your music!\"

NILKANTHA: \"You talk of ferrying. But bless me that I may not be
drowned in the ocean myself.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"If you get drowned, it will be in the Sea of
Immortality.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was delighted with Nilkantha\'s company. He said to the
musician: \"For you to have come here! You whom people see as a result
of many austerities and prayers! Listen to a song.\"

The Master sang a song, two lines of which ran:

> *When the Blissful Mother comes to my house, how much of the Chandi I
> shall hear!*
>
> *How many monks will come here, and how many yogis with matted locks!*

He said, continuing, \"As long as the Divine Mother has come here, many
yogis with matted locks will come too.\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughed. To M., Baburam, and the other devotees he said:
\"I feel very much like laughing. Just fancy, I am singing for these
musicians!\"

NILKANTHA: \"We go about singing; but today we have had our true
reward.\"

MASTER (smiling): \'when a shopkeeper sells an article, he sometimes
gives a little extra something to the buyer. You sang at Nabin\'s house
and have given the extra something here.\"

All laughed.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 31**

ADVICE TO ISHAN

> Saturday, October 11, 1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA lay on the small couch in his room at the Dakshineswar
temple garden. It was about two in

the afternoon. M. and Priya Mukherji were sitting on the floor. M. had
left his school at one o\'clock and had

just arrived at Dakshineswar. The Master was telling anecdotes about the
calculating nature of the wealthy

Jadu Mallick.

**The worldly Jadu Mallick**

MASTER: \"Once I went to Jadu Mallick\'s house. He asked right away,
\'How much is the carriage hire?\' Someone told him it was three rupees
and two *ānnās*. Then he questioned me about it. Next one of his people
secretly asked the coachman, who said it was three rupees and four
*ānnās* (All laugh.) At that he ran to us and said, \'How much did you
say the carriage hire was?\'

\"A broker was present. He said to Jadu: \'There is a plot of land at
Burra bazar for sale. Will you buy it?\' Jadu

asked the price and the broker told him. Jadu said, \'Won\'t he give it
for less?\' I said to Jadu: \'Come, come.

You aren\'t going to buy the land. You\'re only bargaining. Isn\'t that
so?\' He turned to me and laughed.

\"That is the nature of the worldly man. He wants people to come to him.
That spreads his name in the market.

\"Jadu went to Adhar\'s house. I told him it had made Adhar very happy.
He said: \'What? What? Was he really happy?\' A certain Mallick came to
Jadu\'s house. He was very clever and deceitful. I saw it in his eyes. I
looked at him and said: \'It isn\'t good to be clever. The crow is very
clever, but it eats others filth.\' I could tell he was badly off.
Jadu\'s mother was amazed and said to me, \'How did you know he hadn\'t
a penny?\' I saw it from his appearance.\"

Narayan entered the room and sat on the floor.

MASTER (to Priyanath): \"Well, your Hari is a fine young man.\"

PRIYANATH: \"What is so fine about him? Of course, he has a childlike
nature.\"

NARAYAN: \"He addressed his wife as mother.\"

MASTER: \"What! Even I can\'t do that. And he calls her mother! (To
Priyanath) You see, the boy is very quiet. His mind is directed to
God.\"

Sri Ramakrishna changed the subject of conversation.

MASTER: \"Do you know what Hem said? He said to Baburam, \'God alone is
real; all else is illusory.\'(All laugh.) Oh, no! He said it sincerely.
Again, he told me he would take me to his house and sing kirtan. But he
didn\'t do it. I understand that he said later on, \'What will people
say if I sing with drums and cymbals?\' He was afraid that people might
think he was crazy.

**Warning devotees about women**

\"Haripada has fallen into the clutches of a woman of the Ghoshpara
sect. He can\'t get rid of her. He says that she takes him on her lap
and feeds him. She claims that she looks on him as the Baby Krishna. I
have warned him a great many times. She says that she thinks of him as a
child. But this maternal affection soon degenerates into something
dangerous.

\"You see, you should keep far away from woman; then you may realize
God. It is extremely harmful to have

much to do with women who have bad motives, or to eat food from their
hands. They rob a man of his spirituality. Only by being extremely
careful about woman can one preserve one\'s love of God. One day
Bhavanāth, Rākhāl , and some other youngsters had cooked their own meal
in the temple garden. They were sitting at their meal when a Baul
arrived, sat down with them, and said he wanted to eat with them. I said
that there was not enough food; if anything was left it would be kept
for him. He became angry and left. On the Vijaya day a man allows anyone
and everyone to feed him with his own hand. It is not good. But one can
eat food from the hand of a devotee who is pure in heart.

\"You must be extremely careful about women. Women speak of the attitude
of Gopala! Pay no attention to such things. The proverb says: \'A woman
devours the three worlds.\' Many women, when they see handsome and
healthy young men, lay snares for them. That is what they call the
\'attitude of Gopala.\'

\"Those who develop dispassion from early youth, those who roam about
yearning for God from boyhood, those who refuse all worldly life, belong
to a different class. They belong to an unsullied aristocracy. If they
develop true renunciation, they keep themselves at least fifty cubits
away from women lest their spiritual mood should be destroyed. Once
falling into the clutches of women, they no longer remain on the level
of unsullied aristocracy. They fall from it and come to a lower level.
People who practise renunciation from early youth belong to a very high
level. Their ideal is very pure. They are stainless.

**How to conquer passion**

\"How can a man conquer passion? He should assume the attitude of a
woman. I spent many days as the handmaid of God. I dressed myself in
women\'s clothes, put on ornaments, and covered the upper part of my
body with a scarf, just like a woman. With the scarf on I used to
perform the evening worship before the image. Otherwise, how could I
have kept my wife with me for eight months? Both of us behaved as if we
were the handmaids of the Divine Mother. I cannot speak of myself as a
man. One day I was in an ecstatic mood. My wife asked me, \'How do you
regard me?\' \'As the Blissful Mother\', I said.

\"Do you know the significance of the Śiva emblem? It is the worship of
the symbols of fatherhood and motherhood. The devotee worshipping the
image prays, \'O Lord, please grant that I may not be born into this
world again; that I may not have to pass again through a mother\'s
womb.\' \"

A tutor of the Tagores entered the room with some boys of the family.

Sri Ramakrishna continued talking.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Sri Krishna has a peacock feather on His
crest. The feather bears the sign of the female sex. The significance of
this is that Krishna carries Prakriti, the female principle, on His
head. When Krishna joined the circle of the gopis to dance with them, He
appeared there as a woman. That is why you see Him wearing women\'s
apparel in the company of the gopis. Unless a man assumes the nature of
a woman, he is not entitled to her company. Assuming the attitude of a
woman, he can sport with her and enjoy her company.

**Disciplines during the *Sādhanā* period**

But a man must be extremely careful during the early stages of spiritual
discipline. Then he must live far away from any woman. He must not go
too close to one even if she is a great devotee of God. You see, a man
must not sway his body while climbing to the roof; he may fall. Weak
people should hold on to a support while going up the stairs.

\"But it is quite different when one reaches perfection. After the
realization of God there is not much for a man to fear; he has become to
a great extent secure. The important thing is for a man somehow to climb
to the roof. After that he can even dance there. But he cannot dance on
the steps. Again, after climbing to the roof, you need no longer discard
what you discarded before. You find that the stairs are made of the same
materials-bricks, lime, and brick-dust-as the roof. The woman you have
to be so careful about at the beginning

will appear to you, after the realization of God, as the Divine Mother
Herself. Then you will worship her as the Divine Mother. You won\'t fear
her so much.

\"The thing is to touch the \'granny\', as children do in the game of
hide-and-seek. Then you can do whatever you like.

**Planes of mind**

\"Man, looking outward, sees the gross; at that time his mind dwells in
the annamayakosha, the gross body. Next is the subtle body. Functioning
through the subtle body, the mind dwells in the manomayakosha and the
vijnanamayakosha. Next is the causal body. Functioning through the
causal body the mind enjoys bliss; it dwells in the Ānandamaykosha. This
corresponds to the semi-conscious state experienced by Chaitanya. Last
of all, the mind loses itself in the Great Cause. It disappears. It
merges in the Great Cause. What one experiences after that cannot be
described in words. In his inmost state of consciousness, Chaitanya
enjoyed this experience. Do you know what this state is like? Dayananda
described it by saying, \'Come into the inner apartments and shut the
door. Anyone and everyone cannot enter that part of the house.

**On meditation**

\"I used to meditate on the flame of a light. I thought of the red part
as gross, the white part inside the red as subtle, and the stick-like
black part, which is the innermost of all, as the causal.

\"By certain signs you can tell when meditation is being rightly
practised. One of them is that a bird will sit on your head, thinking
you are an inert thing.

\"I first met Keshab at a meeting of the Adi Samaj. Several members of
the Samaj were sitting on the platform. Keshab was in the middle. I saw
him motionless as a log. Pointing to Keshab, I said to Mathur Babu:
\'Look there! That bait has been swallowed by a fish.\' Because of that
power of meditation he achieved what he wanted-name, fame, and so
forth-through the grace of God.

\"One can meditate even with eyes open. One can meditate even while
talking. Take the case of a man with toothache.

TUTOR OF THE TAGORES: \"Yes, sir. I know that very well.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, even when his teeth ache he does all his
duties,but his mind is on the pain. Likewise one can meditate with eyes
open and while talking to others as well.\"

TUTOR: \"One of the epithets of God is the \'Redeemer of the sinner\'.
That is our hope. God is compassionate.\"

MASTER: \"The Sikhs, too, said that God was compassionate. I asked,
\'How is He compassionate?\' \'Why,\' they answered, \'He has begotten
us; He has created so many things for us; He has brought us up to be
men; and He protects us from danger at every step.\' Thereupon I said:
\'After begetting us, God looks after us and feeds us. Is there much
credit in that? Suppose a son is born to you. Do you expect a man from
another part of the city to bring him up?\' \"

**Tendencies from previous births**

TUTOR: \"Revered sir, one man quickly succeeds in spiritual life, and
another doesn\'t succeed at all. How do you explain that?\"

MASTER: \"The truth is that a man succeeds to a great extent because of
tendencies inherited from his previous births. People think he has
attained the goal all of a sudden. A man drank a glass of wine in the
morning. It made him completely drunk. He began to behave improperly.
People were amazed to see that he could be so drunk after one glass. But
another man said, \'Why, he has been drinking all night.\'

\"Hanuman burnt down the golden city of Lanka. People were amazed that a
mere monkey could burn the whole city. But then they said, \'The truth
is that the city was burnt by the sighs of Sita and the wrath of

*Gunās*-

Rāma.\'

\"Look at Lala Babu. He had so much wealth. Could he have renounced it
all so suddenly without the good tendencies of his previous births? And
Rani Bhavani. So much knowledge and devotion in a woman!

\"In his last birth a man is endowed with sattva. His mind is directed
to God. He longs for God. He withdraws his mind from worldly things.

\"Krishnadas Pal came here. I found him full of rajas. But it must be
said that he observed the Hindu customs. He left his shoes outside
before entering the room. After a little conversation I discovered that
he had no stuff inside. I asked him about man\'s duty. He said, \'To do
good to the world.\' I said: \'My dear sir, who are you? What good will
you do to the world? Is the world such a small thing that you think you
can help it?\' \"

Narayan arrived. Sri Ramakrishna was very happy to see him. He seated
Narayan by his side on the small couch. He showed him his love by
stroking his body and giving him sweets to eat. Then he asked Narayan
tenderly, \"Will you have some water?\" Narayan was a student at M.\'s
school. At home his people beat him for visiting Sri Ramakrishna. The
Master said to Narayan with an affectionate smile, \"You had better get
a leather jacket; then the beating won\'t hurt.\" Turning to Harish, the
Master said that he would like to have a smoke.

Again addressing Narayan, Sri Ramakrishna said: \"That woman who has
established an artificial relationship of mother and son with Haripada
came here the other day. I have warned Haripada very often. She belongs
to the Ghoshpara sect. I asked her if she had found her \'man\'. She
said yes, and mentioned a man\'s name.

(To M.) \"Ah! Nilkantha came here the other day. What spiritual fervour
he has! He said he would come here another day and sing for us. They are
dancing over there. Why don\'t you go and see it? (To Ramlal) There is
no oil in the room. (Looking at the oil-jar) The servant hasn\'t filled
it.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was walking up and down, now in his room, now on the
south verandah. Occasionally pausing on the semicircular porch west of
his room, he would look at the Ganges.

After a little while he returned to his room and sat on the small couch.
It was past three in the afternoon. The devotees took their seats on the
floor. The Master sat in silence before them, now and then casting a
glance at the walls, where many pictures were hanging. To Sri
Ramakrishna\'s left was a picture of Sarasvati, and beyond it, a picture
of Gaur and Nitai singing kirtan with their devotees. In front of the
Master hung pictures of Dhruva, Prahlada, and Mother Kāli. On the wall
to his right was another picture of the Divine Mother, Rajarajesvari.
Behind him was a picture of Jesus Christ raising the drowning Peter.
Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna turned to M. and said: \"You see, it is good to
keep pictures of sannyāsis and holy men in one\'s room. When you get up
in the morning you should see the faces of holy persons rather than the
faces of other men. People with rajasic qualities keep \'English\'
pictures on their walls-pictures of rich men, the King, the Queen, the
Prince of Wales, and white men and women walking together. That shows
their rajasic temperament.

\"You acquire the nature of the people whose company you keep. Therefore
even pictures may prove harmful. Again, a man seeks the company that
agrees with his own nature. The paramahamsas keep near them a few young
boys five or six years old. They allow such boys to be near them.
Attaining the state of a paramahamsa,

a man loves the company of boys. Like the paramahamsas, the boys are not
under the control of the sattva, rajas, or tamas.

\"By looking at trees a man awakens in his heart the picture of a
hermitage in which a rishi is practising austerity.\"

A brahmin from Sinthi entered the room and saluted Sri Ramakrishna. He
had studied Vedānta in Benares. He was stout and had a smiling face.

MASTER: \"Hello! How are you? You haven\'t been here in a long time.\"

PUNDIT (smiling): \"Worldly duties, sir. You know I have very little
leisure. The pundit sat down, and the Master began to talk with him.

**Dayananda**

MASTER: \"You spent a long time in Benares. Tell us what you saw there.
Tell us something about Dayananda.\"

PUNDIT: \"Yes, I met him. You also met him, didn\'t you?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, I visited him. He was \'living then in a garden house on
the other side of the Ganges. Keshab was expected there that day. He
longed for Keshab as the chatak bird longs for rain. He was a great
scholar and made fun of the Bengali language. He admitted the existence
of the deities, but Keshab did not. Dayananda used to say: \'God has
created so many things. Couldn\'t He have created the deities?\'
Dayananda believed the Ultimate Reality to be without form. Captain was
repeating the name of Rāma. Dayananda said to him sarcastically,
\'Better repeat \"sandesh\"!\' \"

PUNDIT: \"In Benares the pundits had great discussions with
Dayananda.Finally he was left alone with all the others against him.
They made it so hot for him that he thought the only way to save himself
was by running away. All the pundits shouted with one voice, \'Whatever
Dayananda has said is to be despised!\'

**Theosophy**

\"I saw Colonel Olcott too. The Theosophists believe in the existence of
mahatmas. They also speak of the \'lunar\', \'solar\', \'stellar\', and
other planes. A Theosophist can go in his \'astral body\' to all these
planes. Oh, Olcott said many such things. Well, sir, what do you think
of Theosophy?\"

MASTER: \"The one essential thing is bhakti, loving devotion to God. Do
the Theosophists seek bhakti? They are good if they do. If Theosophy
makes the realization of God the goal of life, then it is good. One
cannot seek God if one constantly busies oneself with the mahatmas and
the lunar, solar, and stellar planes. A man should practise *sādhanā*
and pray to God with a longing heart for love of His Lotus Feet. He
should direct his mind to God alone, withdrawing it from the various
objects of the world.\"

The Master sang:

> *How are you trying, O my mind, to know the nature of God?*
>
> *You are groping like a madman locked in a dark room.*
>
> *He is grasped through ecstatic love; how can you fathom Him Without
> it? . . .*
>
> *And, for that love, the mighty yogis practise yoga from age to age;*
>
> *When love awakes, the Lord, like a magnet, draws to Him the soul.*

Continuing, the Master said: \"You may speak of the scriptures, of
philosophy, of Vedānta; but you will not find God in any of these. You
will never succeed in realizing God unless your soul becomes restless
for Him.

> *Only through affirmation, never negation, can you know Him,*
>
> *Neither through Veda nor through Tantra nor the six darsanas.*
>
> *It is in love\'s elixir only that He delights, O mind;*
>
> *He dwells in the body\'s inmost depths, in Everlasting Joy.*

\"One must be very earnest about God. Listen to another song:

> *Can everyone have the vision of Radha? Can everyone taste her love?*
>
> *This, the rarest treasure of all, no earthly wealth can buy;*

*Without devotions and sādhanā none can ever obtain it.*

> *The raindrop falling upon the deep when Svati shines on high*

*sādhanā*.

> *Is formed within the oyster\'s shell into a priceless pearl.*
>
> *Can such a pearl be formed from rain that falls at other times?*
>
> *Mothers with their babes in arms may beckon to the moon*
>
> *To leave the sky and come to them; but only the babes are fooled.*
>
> *Does the moon ever leave the sky and dwell upon the earth?*

**Preparation for God vision**

\"One must practise intense spiritual discipline. Can one obtain the
vision of God all of a sudden, without any preparation?

\"A man asked, \'Why don\'t I see God?\' I said to him, as the idea came
to my mind: \'You want to catch a big fish. First make arrangements for
it. Throw spiced bait into the water. Get a line and a rod. At the smell
of the bait the fish will come from the deep water. By the movement of
the water you will know that a big fish has come.\'

\"You want to eat butter. But what will you achieve by simply repeating
that there is butter in milk? You have to work hard for it. Only thus
can you separate butter from milk. Can one see God by merely repeating,
\'God

exists\'? One needs

\"The Divine Mother Herself practised austere *sādhanā* to set an
example for mankind. Sri Krishna, who is none other than the Ultimate
Brahman, also practised *sādhanā* to set an example to others.

**Purusha and Prakriti**

\"Sri Krishna is the Purusha and Radha the Prakriti, the ChitŚakti, the
*Ādyāśakti*. Radha is the Prakriti, the embodiment of the three *Gunās*.
Sattva, rajas, and tamas are in her. As you remove the layers of an
onion, you will first see tints of both black and red, then only red,
and last of all only white.

The Vaishnava scriptures speak of \'Kam-Radha\', \'Prem-Radha\', and
\'Nitya-Radha\'. Chandravali is Kam-Radha, and Srimati is Prem-Radha;
Nanda saw Nitya-Radha holding Gopala in Her arms.

\"The Brahman of Vedānta and the ChitŚakti are identical, like water and
its wetness. The moment you think of water you must also think of its
wetness, and the moment you think of water\'s wetness you must also
think of water. Or it is like the snake and its wriggling motion. The
moment you think of the snake you must a1so think of its wriggling
motion, and the moment you think of the snake\'s wriggling motion you
must also think of the snake. When do I call the Ultimate Reality by the
name of Brahman? When It is actionless or unattached to action. When a
man puts on a cloth he remains the same man as when he was naked. He was
naked; now he is clothed. He may be naked again. There is poison in the
snake, but it doesn\'t harm the snake. It is poison to him who is bitten
by the snake.

**Brahman Itself is unattached.**

\"Names and forms are nothing but the manifestations of the power of
Prakriti. Sita said to Hanuman: \'My child, in one form I am Sita , in
another form I am Rāma. In one form I am Indra, in another I am IndRani.
In one form I am Brahma, in another, Brahmani. In one form I am Rudra,
in another, Rudrani.\' Whatever names and forms you see are nothing but
the manifestations of the power of ChitŚakti. Everything is the power of
ChitŚakti-even meditation and he who meditates. As long as I feel that I
am meditating, I am within the jurisdiction of Prakriti. (To M.) Try to
assimilate what I have said. One should hear what the Vedas and the
Puranas say, and carry it out in life.

(To the pundit) \"It is good to live in the company of holy men now and
then. The disease of worldliness has become chronic in man. It is
mitigated, to a great extent, in holy company.

**Knowledge and ignorance**

\"\'I\' and \'mine\'-that is ignorance. True knowledge makes one feel:
\'O God, You alone do everything. You alone

are my own. And to You alone belong houses, buildings, family,
relatives, friends, the whole world. All is Yours.\' But ignorance makes
one feel: \'I am doing everything. I am the doer. House, buildings,
family, children, friends, and property are all mine.\'

**Hollowness of worldly love**

\"Once a teacher was explaining all this to a disciple. He said, \'God
alone, and no one else, is your own.\' The disciple said: \'But, revered
sir, my mother, my wife, and my other relatives take very good care of
me. They see nothing but darkness when I am not present. How much they
love me!\' The teacher said: \'There you are mistaken. I shall show you
presently that nobody is your own. Take these few pills with you. When
you go home, swallow them and lie down in bed. People will think you are
dead, but you will remain conscious of the outside world and will see
and hear everything. Then I shall visit your home.

\"The disciple followed the instructions. He swallowed the pills and lay
as if unconscious in his bed. His mother, wife, and other relatives
began to cry. Just then the teacher came in, in the guise of a
physician, and asked the cause of their grief. When they had told him
everything, he said to them: \'Here is a medicine for him. It will bring
him back to life. But I must tell you one thing. This medicine must
first be taken by one of his relatives and then given to him. But the
relative who takes it first will die. I see his mother, his wife, and
others here. Certainly one of you will volunteer to take the medicine.
Then the young man will come back to life.\'

\"The disciple heard all this. First the physician called his mother,
who was weeping and rolling on the ground in grief. He said to her:
\'Mother, you don\'t need to weep any more. Take this medicine and your
son will come to life. But you will die.\' The mother took the medicine
in her hand and began to think. After much reflection she said to the
physician, with tears in her eyes: \'My child, I have a few more
children. I have to think about them too. I am wondering what will
happen to them if I die. Who will feed them and look after them?\' The
physician next called the wife and handed the medicine to her. She had
been weeping bitterly too. With the medicine in her hand she also began
to reflect. She had heard that she would die from the effect of the
medicine. At last, with tears in her eyes, she said: \'He has met his
fate. If I die, what will happen to my young children? Who will keep
them alive? How can I take the medicine?\' In the mean time the disciple
had got over the effect of the pills. He was now convinced that nobody
was really his own. He jumped out of bed and left the place with his
teacher. The guru said to him, \'There is only one whom you may call
your own, and that is God.\'

\"Therefore a man should act in such a way that he may have bhakti for
the Lotus Feet of God and love God as his very own. You see this world
around you. It exists for you only for a couple of days. There is
nothing to it.\" PUNDIT (smiling): \"Revered sir, I feel a spirit of
total renunciation when I am here. I feel like going away, giving up the
world.\"

MASTER: \"No, no! Why should you give up? Give up mentally. Live
unattached in the world.

\"Surendra wanted to spend the night here occasionally. He brought a bed
and even spent a day or two here. Then his wife said to him, \'You may
go anywhere you like during the day-time, but at night you must not
leave home.\' What could poor Surendra do? Now he has no way of spending
the night away from home.

**Reason and love**

\"What will you achieve by mere reasoning? Be restless for God and learn
to love Him. Reason, mere intellectual knowledge, is like a man who can
go only as far as the outer court of the house. But bhakti is like a
woman who goes into the inner court.

**Different attitudes toward God**

\"One must take up a definite attitude toward God. Then alone can one
realize Him. Rishis like Sanaka cherished the attitude of Śānta; Hanuman
the attitude of a servant; the cowherd boys of Vrindāvan, like Sridāmā
and Sudāmā, the attitude of a friend; Yaśoda the attitude of a mother;
and Radha the attitude of a sweetheart.

\"*\'O God, Thou art the Lord and I am Thy servant\'* - that is the
servant\'s attitude, a very good one for aspirants.\"

PUNDIT: \"Yes, sir.\"

The pundit from Sinthi left. It was dusk. Twilight hung over the
Panchavati, the temples, and the river. Evening worship began in the
different temples, accompanied by the sound of bells, gongs, and
conch-shells. Sri Ramakrishna bowed before the pictures of the deities
in his room. He was sitting on the small couch in an abstracted mood. A
few devotees were on the floor. There was silence in the room.

**Master and Ishan**

An hour passed. Ishan and Kishori entered and sat down on the floor
after saluting Sri Ramakrishna. Ishan was a great ritualist. He was
devoted to the performance of the, various rites and ceremonies
prescribed by the scriptures. The Master opened the conversation.

**Characteristics of Knowledge**

MASTER: \"Can one attain knowledge of God by merely repeating the word
\'God\'? There are two indications of such knowledge. First,
longing,that is to say, love for God. You may indulge in reasoning or
discussion, but if you feel no longing or love, it is all futile.
Second, the awakening of the Kundalini. As long as the Kundalini remains
asleep, you have not attained knowledge of God. You may be spending
hours poring over books or discussing philosophy, but if you have no
inner restlessness for God, you have no knowledge of Him.

**Path of devotion**

\"When the Kundalini is awakened, one attains bhava, bhakti, prema, and
so on. This is the path of devotion.

**Path of karma**

\"The path of karma is very difficult. Through it one obtains some
powers-I mean occult powers.\"

ISHAN: \"Let me go and see Hazra.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sat in silence. After a while Ishan returned to the room
accompanied by Hazra. The Master was still silent. A few moments later
Hazra whispered to Ishan: \"Let\'s leave him alone. Perhaps he will
meditate now.\" Both left the room.

Sri Ramakrishna was still silent. In a few moments the devotees noticed
that he was really meditating. Then he performed japa. He placed his
right hand on his head, then on his forehead, then on his throat, then
on his heart, and last of all on his navel. Was it meditation on the
Primordial Energy in the six centres of the body?

Ishan and Hazra had gone to the Kāli temple. Sri Ramakrishna was
absorbed in meditation. Meanwhile Adhar had arrived. It was about half
past seven.

A little later the Master. went to the Kāli temple. He looked at the
image, took some sacred Rowers from the feet of the Mother, and placed
them on his head. He prostrated himself before the Mother and went round
the image. He waved the chamara. He appeared ecstatic with divine
fervour. Coming out, he found Ishan performing the sandhya with the
kosakusi.

**Rituals are only steps**

MASTER (to Ishan): \"What? You are still here? Are you still performing
the sandhya? Listen to a song:

> *Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas, So
> long as I can breathe my last with Kāli\'s name upon my lips? What
> need of rituals has a man, what need of devotions any more, If he
> repeats the Mother\'s name at the three holy hours? Rituals may pursue
> him close, but never can they overtake him.*
>
> *Charity, vows, and giving of gifts do not appeal to Madan\'s mind;*
>
> *The Blissful Mother\'s Lotus Feet are his whole prayer and sacrifice.
> . . .*

\"How long must a man continue the sandhya ? As long as he has not
developed love for the Lotus Feet of God, as long as he does not shed
tears and his hair does not stand on end when he repeats God\'s name.

> *I bow my head, says Prasad, before desire and liberation; Knowing the
> secret that K āli is one with the highest Brahman, I have discarded,
> once for all, both dharma and adharma.*

\"When the fruit grows, the flower drops off. When one has developed
love of God and has beheld Him, then one gives up the sandhya and other
rites. When the young daughter-in-law is with child, the mother-in-law
reduces her activities. When she has been pregnant for nine months, she
is not allowed to perform any household duty. After the birth of the
child, she only carries the child on her arm and nurses it. She has no
other duty. After the attainment of God, the sandhya and other rites are
given up.

**Master exhorts Ishan**

\"You cannot achieve anything by moving at such a slow pace. You need
stern renunciation. Can you achieve anything by counting fifteen months
as a year? You seem to have no strength, no grit. You are as mushy as
flattened rice soaked in milk. Be up and doing! Gird your loins!

\"I don\'t like that song:

> *Brother, joyfully cling to God;*
>
> *Thus striving, some day you may attain Him.*

I don\'t care for the line, *\'Thus striving, some day you may attain
Him.\'* You need stern renunciation. I say the same thing to Hazra.

\"You ask me why you don\'t feel stern renunciation. There is a reason
for it. You have desires and tendencies within you. The same is true of
Hazra. In our part of the country I have seen peasants bringing water
into their paddy-fields. The fields have low ridges on all sides to
prevent the water from leaking out; but these are made of mud and often
have holes here and there. The peasants work themselves to death to
bring the water, which, however, leaks out through the holes. Desires
are the holes. You practise japa and austerities, no doubt, but they all
leak out through the holes of your desires.

\"They catch fish with a bamboo trap. The bamboo is naturally straight.
But why is it bent in the trap? In order to catch the fish. Desires are
the fish. Therefore the mind is bent down toward the world. If there are
no desires, the mind naturally looks up toward God.

\"Do you know what it is like? It is like the needles of a balance. On
account of the weight of \'woman and gold\' the two needles are not in
line. It is \'woman and gold\' that makes a man stray from the path of
yoga. Haven\'t you noticed the flame of a candle? The slightest wind
makes it waver. The state of yoga is like the candle-flame in a windless
place.

\"The mind is dispersed. Part of it has gone to Dāccā, part to Delhi,
and another part to Coochbehar. That mind is to be gathered in; it must
be concentrated on one object. If you want sixteen *ānnā's* worth of
cloth, then you have to pay the merchant the full sixteen *ānnās*. Yoga
is not possible if there is the slightest obstacle. If there is a tiny
break in the telegraph-wire, then the news cannot be transmitted.

\"You are no doubt in the world. What if you are? You must urrender the
fruit of your action to God. You must not seek any result for yourself.
But mark one thing. The desire for bhakti cannot be called a desire. You
may desire bhakti and pray for it. Practise the tamas of bhakti and
force your demand upon the Divine Mother.

> *This bitterly contested suit between the Mother and Her son-*
>
> *What sport it is! says Ramprasad. I shall not cease tormenting Thee*
>
> *Till Thou Thyself shalt yield the fight and take me in Thine arms at
> last.*

\"Trailokya once remarked, \'As I was born into the family, I have a
share in the estate.\'

\"God is your own Mother. Is She a stepmother? Is it an artificial
relationship? If you cannot force your demand on Her, then on whom can
you force it? Say to Her:

> *Mother, am I Thine eight-months child? Thy red eyes cannot frighten
> me!.*
>
> *A deed of gift I hold in my heart, attested by Thy Husband Śiva;*
>
> *I shall sue Thee, if I must, and with a single point shall win.*

\"God is your own Mother. Enforce your demand. If you are part of a
thing, you feel its attraction. Because of the element of the Divine
Mother in me I feel attracted to Her. A true Saiva has some of the
characteristics of Śiva; he has in him some of the elements of Śiva. He
who is a true Vaishnava is endowed with some of the elements of
Narayana.

\"Nowadays you don\'t have to attend to worldly duties. Spend a few days
thinking of God. You have seen that there is nothing to the world.\"

The Master sang:

> *Remember this, O mind! Nobody is your own:*
>
> *Vain is your wandering in this world.*
>
> *Trapped in the subtle snare of māyā as you are,*
>
> *Do not forget the Mother\'s name.*
>
> *Only a day or two men honour you on earth*
>
> *As lord and master; all too soon*
>
> *That form, so honoured now, must needs be cast away,*
>
> *When Death, the Master, seizes you.*
>
> *Even your beloved wife, for whom, while yet you live,*
>
> *You fret yourself almost to death,*
>
> *Will not go with you then; she too will say farewell,*
>
> *And shun your corpse as an evil thing.*

Continuing, the Master said: \"What are these things you busy yourself
with-this arbitration and leadership? I hear that you settle people\'s
quarrels and that they make you the arbiter. You have been doing this
kind of work a long time. Let those who care for such things do them.
Now devote your mind more and more to the Lotus Feet of God. The saying
goes: \'Ravana died in Lanka and Behula wept bitterly for him!\'

\"Sambhu, too, said, \'I shall build hospitals and dispensaries.\' He
was a devotee of God; so I said to him, \'Will you ask God for hospitals
and dispensaries when you see Him?\'

\"Keshab Sen asked me, \'Why do I not see God?\' I said, \'You do not
see God because you busy yourself with such things as name and fame and
scholarship.\' The mother does not come to the child as long as it sucks
its toy-a red toy. But when, after a few minutes, it throws the toy away
and cries, then the mother takes down the rice-pot from the hearth and
comes running to the child.

\"You are engaged in arbitration. The Divine Mother says to Herself:\'My
child over there is now busy arbitrating and is very happy. Let him
be.\' \"

In the mean time Ishan had been holding Sri Ramakrishna\'s feet. He said
humbly, \"It is not my will that I

should do those things.\"

MASTER: \"I know it. This is the Divine Mother\'s play-Her lila. It is
the will of the Great Enchantress that many should remain entangled in
the world. Do you know what it is like?

> *How many are the boats, O mind,*
>
> *That float on the ocean of this world!*
>
> *How many are those that sink!*

Again,

> *Out of a hundred thousand kites, at best but one or two break free;
> And Thou dost laugh and clap Thy hands, O Mother, watching them!*

Only one or two in a hundred thousand get liberation. The rest are
entangled through the will of the Divine Mother.

\"Haven\'t you seen the game of hide-and-seek? It is the \'granny\'s\'
will that the game should continue. If all touch her and are released,
then the playing comes to a stop. Therefore it is not her will that all
should touch her

\"You see, in big grain stores the merchants keep rice in great heaps
that touch the ceiling. Beside them there are heaps of lentils. To
protect the grain from the mice, the merchants leave trays of puffed
rice and sweetened rice near it. The mice like the smell and the sweet
taste of these and so stayaround the trays. They don\'t find the big
heaps of grain. Similarly, men aredeluded by \'woman and gold\'; they do
not know where God is.

\"Rāma said to Nārada, \'Ask a boon of Me.\' Nārada said: \'O Rāma, is
there anything I lack? What shall I ask of Thee? But if Thou must give
me a boon, grant that I may have selfless love for Thy Lotus Feet and
that I may not be deluded by Thy world-bewitching māyā.\' Rāma said,
\'Nārada, ask something else.\' Nārada again replied: O Rāma, I don\'t
want anything else Be gracious to me and see that I have pure love for
Thy Lotus Feet.\'

\"I prayed to the Divine Mother: \'O Mother, I don\'t want name and fame
I don\'t want the eight occult powers. I don\'t want a hundred occult
powers O Mother, I have no desire for creature comforts. Please, Mother,
grant me the boon that I may have pure love for Thy Lotus Feet.\'

\"It is written in the Adhyātma Rāmāyana that Lakshmana asked Rāma
\'Rāma, in how many forms and moods do You exist? How shall I be able to
recognize You?\' Rāma said: \'Brother, remember this. You may be certain
that I exist wherever you find the manifestation of ecstatic love.\'
That love makes one laugh and weep and dance and sing; if anyone has
developed such love, you may know for certain that God Himself is
manifest there. Chaitanyadeva reached that state.\"

The devotees listened spellbound to Sri Ramakrishna. His burning words
entered their souls, spurring them along the path of renunciation.

Now he spoke to Ishan in a serious voice.

MASTER: \"Don\'t forget yourself because of what you hear from your
flatterers. Flatterers gather around a worldly man. Vultures gather
around the carcass of a cow.

\"Worldly people have no stuff in them. They are like a heap of
cow-dung. Flatterers come to them and say:

\'You are so charitable and wise! You are so pious!\' These are not mere
words but pointed bamboos thrust at

them. How foolish it is! To be surrounded day and night by a bunch of
worldly brahmin pundits and hear their flattery!

\"Worldly men are slaves of three things: they are slaves of their
wives, slaves of their money, slaves of their masters. Can they have any
inner stuff? There is a certain person whom I shall not name; he earns
eight hundred rupees a month but is the slave of his wife. He stands up
or sits down at her bidding.

\"Arbitration and leadership? How trifling these are! Charity and doing
good to others? You have had enough of these. Those who are to devote
themselves to such things belong to a different class. Now the time is
ripe for you to devote your mind to the Lotus Feet of God. If you
realize God, you will get everything else. First God, then charity,
doing good to others, doing good to the world, and redeeming people. Why
need you worry about these things. \'Ravana died in Lanka and Behula
wept for him bitterly!\'

\"That\'s the trouble with you. It will be very good if a
world-renouncing sannyāsi gives you some spiritual instruction. The
advice of the worldly man will not be right, be he a brahmin pundit or
anyone else.

\"Be mad! Be mad with love of God! Let people know that Ishan has gone
mad and cannot perform worldly duties any more. Then people will no
longer come to you for leadership and arbitration. Throw aside the
kosakusi and justify your name of Ishan.\"

Ishan quoted:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason?*

MASTER: \"Mad! That\'s the thing! Shivanath once said that one \'loses
one\'s head\' by thinking too much of God. \'What?\' said I. \'Can
anyone ever become unconscious by thinking of Consciousness? God is of
the nature of Eternity, Purity, and Consciousness. Through His
Consciousness one becomes conscious of everything; through His
Intelligence the whole world appears intelligent.\' Shivanath said that
some Europeans had gone insane, that they had \'lost their heads\', by
thinking too much about God. In their case it may be true; for they
think of worldly things. There is a line in a song: \'Divine fervour
fills my body and robs me of consciousness.\' The consciousness referred
to here is the consciousness of the outer world.\"

Ishan was seated touching Sri Ramakrishna\'s feet and listening to his
words. Now and then he cast a glance at the basalt image of Kāli in the
shrine. In the light of the lamp She appeared to be smiling. It was as
if the living Deity, manifesting Herself through the image, was
delighted to hear the Master\'s words, holy as the words of the Vedas.

ISHAN (pointing to the image); \"Those words from your sacred lips have
really come from there.\"

MASTER: \"I am the machine and She is the Operator. I am the house and
She is the Indweller. I am the chariot and She is the Charioteer. I move
as She moves me; I speak as She speaks through me. In the Kaliyuga one
does not hear the voice of God, it is said, except through the mouth of
a child or a madman or some such person.

\"A man cannot be a guru. Everything happens by the will of God. Heinous
sins-the sins of many births-and accumulated ignorance all disappear in
the twinkling of an eye, through the grace of God. When light enters a
room that has been kept dark a thousand years, does it remove the
thousand years\' darkness little by little, or instantly? Of course, at
the mere touch of light all the darkness disappears.

\"What can a man do? He may speak many words, but after all is said and
done everything rests with God. The lawyer says: \'I have said all that
can be said. Now the verdict rests with the judge.\'

\"Brahman is actionless. When It is engaged in creation, preservation,
and dissolution, It is called the Primal Power, *Ādyāśakti*. This Power
must be propitiated. Don\'t you know that it is so written in the
Chandi? The gods

first sang a hymn to the*Ādyāśakti* in order to propitiate Her. Only
then did Hari wake up from His yoga sleep.\"

ISHAN: \"Yes, sir. Brahma and the other gods sang this hymn at the
timeof the death of the demons Madhu and Kaitabha:

> *Svaha, Vashat, and Svadha art Thou; Thou the inner Self of the
> mantra; Thou the Nectar of Immortality, O Everlasting One! Eternal and
> unutterable art Thou, and yet Thou art manifest*
>
> *In the three matras and the half matra:*
>
> *O Goddess, Thou art Savitri; Thou art the Ultimate Mother;*
>
> *All things have their support in Thee, by whom this universe was
> made.*
>
> *O Goddess, Thou sustainest all, and all by Thee is devoured!*
>
> *Thou it is that we call the Creator, when Thou createst the world,*
>
> *O Embodiment of creation!*
>
> *Thou it is that we call the Preserver, when Thou preservest it;*
>
> *Thou it is that we call the Destroyer, when Thou destroyest it.\"*

MASTER: \"Yes, but you must assimilate that.\"

The Master rose. He mounted the platform in front of the shrine and
saluted the Mother, touching the ground with his forehead. The devotees
quickly gathered around him and fell at his feet. They all begged his
grace. He descended from the platform and started toward his room,
conversing with M. First he sang:

> *I bow my head, says Prasad, before desire and liberation; Knowing the
> secret that K āli is one with the highest Brahman, I have discarded,
> once for all, both dharma and adharma.*

The Master continued: \"Do you know the meaning of dharma and adharma?
Here dharma means religious acts enjoined by the scriptures, suchas
charity, sraddha, feeding the poor, and the like.

\"The performance of this dharma is called the path of karma. It is an
extremely difficult path: it is very hard to act without motive.
Therefore one is asked to pursue the path of devotion.

\"A man was performing the sraddha ceremony at his house. He was feeding
many people. Just then a butcher passed, leading a cow to slaughter. He
could not control the animal and became exhausted. He said to himself:
\'Let me go into that house and enjoy the feast of the sraddha ceremony
and strengthen my body. Then I shall be able to drag the cow along.\' So
he carried out his intention. But when he killed the cow, the sin of the
slaughter fell also on the performer of the sraddha. That is why I say
the path of devotion is better than the path of action.\"

The Master entered his room accompanied by M. He was humming a song. The
forceful words of renunciation that he had just spoken to Ishan found
expression through its words. He sang the lines:

> *Mother, take everything else away from me,*
>
> *But leave me my necklace of bones and my pot of hemp!*

Sri Ramakrishna sat down on the small couch, and Adhar, Kishori, and the
other devotees sat on the foor.

MASTER (to tile devotees): \"I was noticing Ishan, Why, he hasn\'t
achieved anything! What can be the reason? He practised the purascharana
for five months. That would have caused a revolution in any other
person.\'

ADHAR: \"It wasn\'t wise of you to say those things to him in front of
us.\"

MASTER: \"How is that? He is so much given to japa! How can words affect
him?\"

After a while Sri Ramakrishna said to Adhar, \"Ishan is very charitable,
and he practises japa and austerity a great deal.\" The Master remained
quiet a few moments. The eyes of the devotees were fixed on him.
Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna said to Adhar, \"You have both-yoga and
bhoga.\"

**Saturday, October 18, 1884**

It was the day of the worship of Kāli, the Divine Mother. The worship
was to begin at eleven o\'clock at night.

Several devotees arrived at the temple.

> *All creation is the sport of my mad Mother Kāli;*
>
> *By Her māyā the three worlds are bewitched.*
>
> *Mad is She and mad is Her Husband; mad are Her two disciples! None
> can describe Her loveliness, Her glories, gestures, moods; Śiva, with
> the agony of the poison in His throat, Chants Her name again and
> again.*
>
> *The Personal does She oppose to the Impersonal,*
>
> *Breaking one stone with another;*
>
> *Though to all else She is agreeable,*
>
> *Where duties are concerned She will not yield.*
>
> *Keep your raft, says Ramprasad, afloat on the sea of life, Drifting
> up with the flood-tide, drifting down with the ebb.*

The Master was quite overwhelmed with the song. He said that songs like
these denoted a state of divine inebriation. He sang one after another:

> *This time I shall devour Thee utterly, Mother Kāli!*
>
> *For I was born under an evil star,*
>
> *And one so born becomes, they say, the eater of his mother. . . .*

Then:

1.  *Kāli, my Mother full of Bliss! Enchantress of the Almighty Śiva! In
    > Thy delirious joy Thou dancest, clapping Thy hands together! . .
    > .*

And then:

> *If at the last my life-breath leaves me as I repeat the name of Kāli,
> I shall attain the realm of Śiva. What does Benares mean to me?
> Infinite are my Mother\'s glories; who can find the end of Her
> virtues? Śiva, beholding their smallest part, lies prostrate at Her
> Lotus Feet.*
>
> *The singing was over. Two sons of Rajnarayan entered the room and
> bowed low before the Master. In the afternoon they had sung with their
> father the glories of the Divine Mother. The Master sang again with
> them: All creation is the sport of my mad Mother Kāli*

The younger brother requested Sri Ramakrishna to sing a certain song
about Sri Gaurānga. The Master sang:

> *Gaur and Nitai, ye blessed brothers!*
>
> *I have heard how kind you are,*
>
> *And therefore I have come to you. . . .*

Ramlal entered the room. The Master said to him: \"Please sing something
about the Divine Mother. It is the day of Her worship.\"

Ramlal sang:

*Who is the Woman yonder who lights the field of battle?*

> *Darker Her body gleams even than the darkest storm-cloud, And from
> Her teeth there flash the lightning\'s blinding flames!*
>
> *Dishevelled Her hair is flying behind as She rushes about,*
>
> *Undaunted in this war between the gods and the demons.*
>
> *Laughing Her terrible laugh, She slays the fleeing asuras,*
>
> *And with Her dazzling flashes She bares the horror of war. . . .*

Again Ramlal sang:

> *Who, is this terrible Woman, dark as the sky at midnight?*
>
> *Who is this Woman dancing over the field of battle? . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna began to dance to the song. Then he himself sang:

> *The black bee of my mind is drawn in sheer delight*
>
> *To the blue lotus flower of Mother Syama\'s feet,*
>
> *The blue flower of the feet of Kāli, Śiva\'s Consort.*
>
> *Tasteless, to the bee, are the blossoms of desire.*
>
> *My Mother\'s feet are black, and black, too, is the bee;*
>
> *Black is made one with black! This much of the mystery*
>
> *These mortal eyes behold, then hastily retreat.*
>
> *But Kamalakanta\'s hopes are answered in the end;*
>
> *He swims in the Sea of Bliss, unmoved by joy or pain.*

After the music and dancing Sri Ramakrishna sat on the couch and the
devotees sat on the floor. He said to M.: \"It is a pity you weren\'t
here in the afternoon. The musical recital of the Chandi was very
fine.\"

Some of the devotees went to the temple to salute the image of the
Divine Mother. Others sat quietly performing japa on the steps leading
to the Ganges. It was about eleven o\'clock, the most auspicious time
for contemplation of the Divine Mother. The flood-tide was rising in the
Ganges, and the lights on its banks were reflected here and there in its
dark waters.

From outside the shrine M. was looking wistfully at the image. Ramlal
came to the temple with a book in his hand containing the rules of the
worship. He asked M. if he wanted to come in. M. felt highly favoured
and entered the shrine. He saw that the Divine Mother was profusely
decorated. The room was brilliantly illuminated by a large chandelier
that hung from the ceiling. Two candles were burning in front of the
image. On the floor were trays full of offerings. Red hibiscus flowers
and bel-leaves adorned Her feet. She wore garlands round Her neck, M.\'s
eyes fell on the chamara. Suddenly he remembered that Sri Ramakrishna
often fanned the Divine Mother with it. With some hesitation he asked
Ramlal if he might fan the image. The priest gave his permission. M.
joyously fanned the image. The regular worship had not yet begun.

The devotees again entered the Master\'s room. Beni Pāl had invited Sri
Ramakrishna to visit the Sinthi Brahmo Samaj the next day, but had made
a mistake in his letter with regard to the date.

MASTER (to M.): \"Beni Pāl has sent me an invitation. But why has he put
the wrong date?\"

M: \"The date was not written correctly. He wrote the letter
carelessly.\"

As Sri Ramakrishna spoke, he was standing in the middle of the room with
Baburam by his side. He leaned toward the disciple, touching his body.

Suddenly he went into samādhi. The devotees stood around with their eyes
fixed on him. The Master\'s left foot was advanced a little; the
shoulder was slightly inclined to one side; his arm rested on Baburam\'s
neck near the ear. After a while he came down from the ecstatic state.
As he stood there he put one hand to his cheek

and appeared to be brooding over something. Then, smiling, he addressed
the devotees.

MASTER: \"I saw everything-how far the devotees had advanced. I saw
Rākhāl , him (pointing to M.), Surendra, Baburam, and many others.\"

HAZRA: \"Me?\"

MASTER: \"Yes.\"

HAZRA: \"Many more obstacles?\"

MASTER: \"No.\"

HAZRA: \"What about Narendra?\"

MASTER: \"I didn\'t see him. But I can tell about him. He is a little
entangled. But I saw that everyone will succeed. (To M.) I saw that all
are in hiding.\"

The devotees listened to these words with great wonder. It seemed to
them that they were hearing an oracle.

MASTER: \"But I got into that mood by touching Baburam.\"

HAZRA: \"Who is first?\"

Sri Ramakrishna was quiet for a time. Then he said, \"I wish I had a few
like Nityagopal.\" Again he appeared thoughtful. He remained standing.
He said: \"I wish Adhar Sen\'s duties would become fewer. But I am
afraid the English officer will scold him. He may say, \'What is all
this nonsense?\'\" (All smile.)

Sri Ramakrishna sat on the small couch, and the devotees on the floor.
Baburam. and Kishori came quickly to the Master and began to stroke his
feet gently.

MASTER (to Kishori): \"What\'s the matter? Why so much service today?

**The worship in the temple**

Ramlal entered the room and saluted Sri Ramakrishna, touching the ground
with his forehead. Then with great respect he touched the Master\'s
feet. He was ready to worship the Divine Mother in the temple.

RAMLAL: \"Please permit me to go to the shrine.\"

The Master twice uttered the words \"Om Kāli\" and said: \"Perform the
worship carefully. There is also a sheep to be slaughtered.\"

It was midnight. The worship began in the Kāli temple. The Master went
to watch the ceremony. During the worship he stood near the image. Now
the sheep was going to be slaughtered. The animal was consecrated before
the Deity. People stood in lines watching the ceremony. While the sheep
was being taken to the block Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room. He
could not bear the sight.

Several devotees remained in the temple till two o\'clock in the
morning. Haripada came and asked them to take the prasad to the
Master\'s room. After finishing their meal they lay down wherever they
could for the remainder of the night.

It was morning. The dawn service in the temples was over and the
theatrical performance was going on in the open hall in front of the
shrine. M. was coming through the courtyard with Sri Ramakrishna. He
wanted to take leave of the Master.

MASTER: \"Why should you go now?\"

1.  \"You are going to Sinthi in the afternoon. I too intend to be
    there. So I should like to go home for a few hours.\"

They came to the Kāli temple. At the foot of the steps M. saluted the
Master.

MASTER: \"You are going? All right. Please bring two pieces of cheap
cloth for me. I shall use them while taking my bath.\"

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 32**

VISIT TO THE SINTHI BRAMO SAMAJ

> October 19, 1884

ON THIS DAY Sri Ramakrishna again visited the Sinthi Brahmo Samaj. It
was the occasion of the autumn

festival of the Samaj, which was being celebrated at Benimadhav Pal\'s
garden house. The hall was decorated

with flowers and greens, flags and festoons, of various colours.
Outside, the blue autumn sky with its fleecy

clouds was reflected in the water of the lake.

Sri Ramakrishna arrived at half past four in the afternoon. Entering the
hall, he bowed down before the altar. The Brahmo devotees, among whom
could be noticed Vijay and Trailokya, sat around him. A sub-judge, who
was a member of the Brahmo Samaj, was with them.

Trailokya was entertaining the devotees with his melodious music.

MASTER (to Trailokya): \"That song of yours, \'O Mother, make me mad
with Thy love\', I enjoy very much. Won\'t you sing it?\"

Trailokya sang:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason?*
>
> *Make me drunk with Thy love\'s Wine;*
>
> *O Thou who stealest Thy bhaktas\' hearts,*
>
> *Drown me deep in the Sea of Thy love!*
>
> *Here in this world, this madhouse of Thine,*
>
> *Some laugh, some weep, some dance for joy:*
>
> *Jesus, Buddha, Moses, Gaurānga,*
>
> *All are drunk with the Wine of Thy love.*
>
> *O Mother, when shall I be blessed*
>
> *By joining their blissful company?*

As he listened to the song, the Master\'s mind underwent a
transformation, and presently he went into deep samādhi. Coming down a
little to the plane of the sense world, he gave instruction to the
devotees. His mind was still charged with the divine experience. His
words were spoken as if in a state of intoxication. Gradually he became
again fully conscious of the world.

MASTER: \"O Mother! I don\'t want the bliss of divine inebriation. I
shall eat siddhi.

**Occult powers**

(To the devotees) \"By \'siddhi\' I mean the attainment of the spiritual
goal and not one of the eight occult powers. About the occult powers,
Sri Krishna said to Arjuna, \'Friend, if you find anyone who has
acquired even one of the eight powers, then know for certain he will not
realize Me.\' For powers surely beget pride, and God cannot be realized
if there is the slightest trace of pride.

**Four classes of devotees**

\"According to a certain school of thought there are four classes of
devotees: the pravartaka, the sadhaka, the siddha, and the siddha of the
siddha. He who has just begun religious life is a pravartaka. Such a man
puts his denominational marks on his body and forehead, wears a rosary
around his neck, and scrupulously follows other outer conventions. The
sadhaka has advanced farther. His desire for outer show has become less.
He longs for the realization of God and prays to Him sincerely. He
repeats the name of God and calls on Him with a guileless heart. Now,
whom should we call the siddha? He who has the absolute conviction that
Cod exists and is the sole Doer; he who has seen God. And who is the
siddha of the siddha? He who has not merely seen

God, but has intimately talked with Him as Father, Son, or Beloved.

**Difference between intellectual understanding and actual vision**

\"It is one thing to believe beyond a doubt that fire exists in wood,
but it is quite another to get the fire from the wood, cook rice with
its help, appease one\'s hunger, and so be satisfied. These are two
entirely different things.

\"No one can put a limit to spiritual experience. If you refer to one
experience, there is another beyond that, and still another, and so on.

**Advice to Brahmo**

(In an ecstatic mood, referring to the Brahmos) \'They are Brahma
jnanis. They believe in the formless Deity.

That is good.

(To the Brahmo devotees) \"Be firm in one ideal-either in God with form
or in the formless God. Then alone will you realize God; otherwise not.
With firm and unwavering belief the followers of God with form will
realize Him, as will those who speak of Him as formless. You may eat a
cake with icing either straight or sidewise; it will taste sweet either
way. (All laugh.)

**Need of firmness and conviction**

\"But you must have firm conviction, you must pray to Him
whole-heartedly.

**Faith of the worldly-minded**

Do you know what the God of worldly people is like? It is like
children\'s saying to one another while at play, \'I swear by God.\'
They have learnt the word from the quarrels of their aunts or
grandmothers. Or it is like God to a dandy. The dandy, all spick and
span, his lips red from chewing betel-leaf, walks in the garden, cane in
hand, and, plucking a flower, exclaims to his friend, \'Ah! What a
beautiful flower God has made!\' But this feeling of a worldly person is
momentary. It lasts as long as a drop of water on a red-hot frying-pan.

\"You must be firm in one ideal. Dive deep. Otherwise you cannot get the
gems at the bottom of the ocean. You cannot pick up the gems if you only
float on the surface.\"

With these words the Master sang in the sweet voice that had bewitched
the hearts of devotees like Keshab:

> *Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God\'s Beauty;*
>
> *If you descend to the uttermost depths,*
>
> *There you will find the gem of Love. . . .*
>
> *The devotees felt as if they were in paradise itself.*

**Seek the Creator and not the world\'s beauty**

MASTER (to the Brahmos): \"Dive deep. Learn to love God. Plunge into
divine love. You see, I have heard how you pray. Why do you Brahmos
dwell so much on the glories of God? Is there such great need of your
saying over and over again, \'O God, You have created the sky, the great
oceans, the lunar world, the solar world, and the stellar world\'?

\"Everybody is wonder-struck at the mere sight of a rich man\'s garden
house. People become speechless at the sight of the trees, the flowers,
the ponds, the drawing-room, the pictures. But alas, how few are they
who seek the owner of all these! Only one or two inquire after him. He
who seeks God with a longing heart can see Him, talk to Him as I am
talking to you. Believe my words when I say that God can be seen. But
ah! To whom am I saying these words? Who will believe me?

**Futility of mere study**

\"Can one find God in the sacred books? By reading the scriptures one
may feel at the most that God exists.

But God does not reveal Himself to a man unless he himself dives deep.
Only after such a plunge, after the revelation of God through His grace,
is one\'s doubt destroyed. You. may read scriptures by the thousands and
recite thousands of texts; but unless you plunge into God with yearning
of heart, you will not comprehend Him. By mere scholarship you may fool
man, but not God.

\"Scriptures and books-what can one achieve with these alone? Nothing
can be realized without His grace. Strive with a longing heart for His
grace. Through His grace you will see Him and He will talk to you.\"

**Different degrees of divine manifestation**

SUB-JUDGE: \"Sir, does God show more grace to one than to another? If
so, He can be accused of the fault of partiality.\"

MASTER: \"What are you saying? Do you mean to say that the moon and a
glow-worm are the same, though both give light? Iswar Vidyāsāgar asked
me the same question. He said, \'Is it a fact, sir, that God gives more
power to one and less to another?\' \'God\', I said, \'exists in every
being as the All pervading Spirit. He is in the ant as well as in me.
But there are different manifestations of His Power in different beings.
If all are the same, then why have we come here to see you, attracted by
your renown? Have you grown a pair of horns? Oh, no! It is not that. You
have compassion; you have scholarship; there is a greater degree of
these virtues in you than in others. That is the reason you are so well
known.\' Don\'t you see that there are men who, single-handed, can
defeat a hundred persons? Again, one man takes to his heels in fear of
another; you see such a person, too. If there are not different
manifestations of power in different beings, then why did people respect
Keshab Sen so much?

\"It is said in the Gitā that if a man is respected and honoured by
many, whether it be for his scholarship or his music or his oratory or
anything else, then you may know for certain that he is endowed with a
special divine power.\"

A BRAMO (to the sub-judge): \"Why don\'t you accept what he says?\"

MASTER (sharply, to the Brahmo): \"What sort of man are you? To accept
words without conviction! Why, that is hypocrisy! I see you are only a
counterfeit.\"

The Brahmo was much embarrassed.

**Advice to the worldly-minded & Prayer in solitude**

SUB-JUDGE: \"Sir, must we renounce the world?\"

MASTER: \"No. Why should you? A man can realize God even in the world.
But at the beginning he must spend a few days in solitude. He must
practise spiritual discipline in a solitary place. He should take a room
near his house, so that he may come home only for his meals. Keshab,
Pratap, and others said to me, \'Sir, we follow the ideal of King
Janaka.\' \'Mere words don\'t make a King Janaka\', I replied. \'How
many austerities King Janaka first had to perform in solitude-standing
on his head, and so on! Do something first; then you may become a King
Janaka.\' You see a man writing English fluently; but could he do that
at the very start? Perhaps he was the son of poor parents; he was cook
in a family and earned his meals by his service. Perhaps he had to
struggle hard to go on with his studies. It is after all these efforts
that he can now write such fluent English.

**Danger of \"woman and gold\"**

\"I said to Keshab Sen further, \'How can the worldly man be cured of
his serious disease unless he goes into solitude?\' A worldly man is
suffering from delirious fever, as it were. Suppose there are pickled
tamarind and jars of water in the room of such a patient. Now, how can
you expect him to get rid of the disease? Just see, the very mention of
pickled tamarind is making my mouth water! (All laugh.) You can very
well imagine what will happen if the tamarind is actually put in front
of me. To a man, a woman is the pickled tamarind, and his desire for
enjoyment, the jars of water. There is neither end nor limit to this
desire for worldly enjoyment. And the things are in the patient\'s very
room. Can you expect the patient to get rid of the delirious fever in
this

fashion? He must be removed for a few days to another place where there
are neither pickled tamarind nor water-jars. Then he will be cured.
After that if he returns to his old room he will have nothing to fear.
\'Woman and gold\' cannot do any harm to the man who lives in the world
after attaining God. Only then can he lead a detached life in the world
as King Janaka did. But he must be careful at the beginning. He must
practise spiritual discipline in strict solitude. The peepal-tree, when
young, is fenced around to protect it from cattle. But there is no need
for the fence when the trunk grows thick and strong. Then no harm will
be done to the tree even if an elephant is tied to it. \'Woman and
gold\' will not be able to harm you in the least, if you go home and
lead a householder\'s life after increasing your spiritual strength and
developing love for the Lotus Feet of God through the practice of
spiritual discipline in solitude.

\"A man sets milk in a quiet place to curdle, and then he extracts
butter from the curd. After once extracting the butter of Devotion and
Knowledge from the milk of the mind, if you keep that transformed mind
in the water of the world, it will float in the world unattached. But if
the mind in its \'unripe\' state-that is to say, when it is just like
liquid milk-is kept in the water of the world, then the milk and water
will get mixed. In that case it will be impossible for the mind to float
unattached in the world.

\"Live in the world but, in order to realize God, hold fast to His Lotus
Feet with one hand and with the other do your duties. When you get a
respite from your duties, cling to God\'s Lotus Feet with both
hands-live in solitude and meditate on Him and serve Him ceaselessly.\"

SUB-JUDGE (joyously): \"Sir, these are very beautiful words indeed. Of
course one must practise spiritual discipline in solitude. But we forget
all about it. We think we have become King Janaka outright! (The Master
and the devotees laugh.) I feel very happy and peaceful even to hear
that there is no need to give up the world and that God can be realized
from home as well.\"

MASTER: \"Why should you give up the world? Since you must fight, it is
wise for you to fight from a fort. You must fight against your
sense-organs, against your hunger and thirst. Therefore you will be wise
to face the battle from the world. Further, in the Kaliyuga the life of
a man depends on his food. If one day you have nothing to eat, then you
will forget all about God. A man once said to his wife, \'I am going to
leave the world.\' She was a sensible woman. She said: \'Why should you
wander about? If you don\'t have to knock at ten doors for your
stomach\'s sake, go. But if that is the case, then better live in this
one place.\'

\"Again I say, why should you give up the world? You will find it more
convenient at home. You won\'t have to worry about food. You may even
live with your wife. It isn\'t harmful. You will find near at hand all
that the body needs at different times. When you are ill, you will have
someone near you to nurse you.

\"Sages like Janaka, Vyāsa, and Vasishtha lived in the world after
attaining Knowledge. They fenced with two swords, the one of Knowledge
and the other of action.\"

SUB-JUDGE: \"How can we know that we have Knowledge?\"

MASTER: \"When one has Knowledge one does not see God any more at a
distance. One does not think of Him any more as \'He\'. He becomes
\'This\'. Then He is seen in one\'s own heart. God dwells in every man.
He who seeks God realizes Him.\"

**Sin and God\'s name**

SUB-JUDGE: \"Sir, I am a sinner. How can I say that God dwells in me?\"

MASTER: \"That\'s the one trouble with you Brahmos. With you it is
always sin and sin! That\'s the Christian view, isn\'t it? Once a man
gave me a Bible.A part of it was read to me, and it was full of that one
thing-sin and sin! One must have such faith that one can say: \'I have
uttered the name of God; I have repeated the name of Rāma or Hari. How
can I be a sinner?\' One must have faith in the glory of God\'s name.\"

SUB-JUDGE: \"Sir, how can one have such faith?\"

MASTER: \"Have passionate love for God. One of your Brahmo songs says:

> *O Lord, is it ever possible to know Thee without love,*
>
> *However much one may perform worship and sacrifice?*

Pray to God in secret and with yearning, that you may have that
passionate attachment and devotion to Him. Shed tears for Him. A man
sheds a jugful of tears because his wife is sick or because he is losing
money or because he is worrying about getting a job. But tell me, who
ever weeps for God?\'

**Self-surrender to God**

TRAlLOKYA: \"Sir, where is people\'s leisure? They must serve their
English masters.\"

MASTER: \"Well, then give God the power of attorney. If a man entrusts
his affairs to a good person, will the latter do him any harm? With all
the sincerity of your heart resign yourself to God and drive all your
worries out of your mind. Do whatever duties He has assigned to you. The
kitten does not have a calculating mind. It only cries, \'Mew, mew!\' It
lies in the kitchen contentedly if the mother cat leaves it there, and
only calls the mother, crying, \'Mew, mew!\' It has the same feeling of
contentment when the mother cat puts it on the soft bed of the master of
the house. It only cries for its mother.\"

**Duty to wife and children**

SUB-JUDGE: \"Sir, we are householders. How long should we perform our
worldly duties?\"

MASTER: \"Surely you have duties to perform. You must bring up your
children, support your wife, and provide for her in case of your death.
If you don\'t, then I shall call you unkind. Sages like Sukadeva had
compassion. He who has no compassion is no man.\"

SUB-JUDGE: \"How long should one support one\'s children?\"

MASTER: \"As long as they have not reached their majority. When the
chick becomes a full-grown bird and can look after itself, then the
mother bird pecks it and doesn\'t allow it to come near her.\" (All
laugh.)

SUB-JUDGE: \"What is a householder\'s duty to his wife?\"

MASTER: \"You should give her spiritual advice and support her during
your lifetime and provide for her livelihood after your death, if she is
a chaste wife.

\"But if you are intoxicated with the Knowledge of God, then you have no
more duties to perform. Then God Himself will think about your morrow if
you yourself cannot do so. God Himself will think about your family if
you are intoxicated with Him. If a landlord dies leaving behind a minor
son, then a guardian appointed by the court takes charge of the son.
These are all points of law; you know them.\"

SUB-JUDGE: \"Yes, sir.\"

VIJAY: \"Ah! Priceless words! God Himself carries on His shoulders all
the responsibilities of a person who thinks of Him with single-minded
devotion and is mad with divine love. A minor gets his guardian without
seeking him. Alas, when shall I have that state of mind? How lucky they
are who feel that way!\"

TRAILOKYA: \"Is it ever possible, sir, to have true knowledge of God
while living in the world? Can one realize God here?\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Why do you worry? You are enjoying both treacle
and refined sugar. (All laugh.) You are living in the world with your
mind in God. Isn\'t that true? Why shouldn\'t a man realize God in the
world\'? Certainly he can.\"

TRAILOKYA: What are the signs of a householder having attained
Knowledge?\"

MASTER: \"His tears will flow, and the hair on his body will stand on
end. No sooner does he hear the sweet name of God than the hair on his
body stands on end from sheer delight, and tears roll down his cheeks.
\"A man cannot get rid of body-consciousness as long as he is attached
to worldly things and loves \'woman and gold\'. As he becomes less and
less attached to worldly things, he approaches nearer and nearer to the
Knowledge of Self. He also becomes less and less conscious of his body.
He attains Self-Knowledge when his worldly attachment totally
disappears. Then he realizes that body and soul are two separate things.
It is very difficult to separate with a knife the kernel of a coconut
from the shell before the milk inside has dried up. When the milk dries
up, the kernel rattles inside the shell. At that time it loosens itself
from the shell. Then the fruit is called a dry coconut.

**Signs of God-vision**

\"The sign of a man\'s having realized God is that he has become like a
dry coconut. He has become utterly free from the consciousness that he
is the body. He does not feel happy or unhappy with the happiness or
unhappiness of the body. He does not seek the comforts of the body. He
roams about in the world as a jivanmukta, one liberated in life. \'The
devotee of Kāli is a jivanmukta , full of Eternal Bliss.\'

\"When you find that the very mention of God\'s name brings tears to
your eyes and makes your hair stand on end, then you will know that you
have freed yourself from attachment to \'woman and gold\' and attained
God. If the matches are dry, you get a spark by striking only one of
them. But if they are damp, you don\'t get a spark even if you strike
fifty. You only waste matches. Similarly, if your mind is soaked in the
pleasure of worldly things, in \'woman and gold\', then
God-Consciousness will not be kindled in you. You may try a thousand
times, but all your efforts will be futile. But no sooner does
attachment to worldly pleasure dry up than the spark of God flashes
forth.\"

**Force your demand on the Divine Mother**

TRAILOKYA: \"What is the way to dry up the craving for worldly
pleasure?\"

MASTER: \"Pray to the Divine Mother with a longing heart. Her vision
dries up all craving for the world and completely destroys all
attachment to \'woman and gold\'. It happens instantly if you think of
Her as your own mother. She is by no means a godmother. She is your own
mother. With a yearning heart persist in your demands on Her. The child
holds to the skirt of its mother and begs a penny of her to buy a kite.
Perhaps the mother is gossiping with her friends. At first she refuses
to give the penny and says to the child: \'No, you can\'t have it. Your
daddy has asked me not to give you money. When he comes home I\'ll ask
him about it. You will get into trouble if you play with a kite now.\'
The child begins to cry and will not give up his demand. Then the mother
says to her friends: \'Excuse me a moment. Let me pacify this child.\'
Immediately she unlocks the cash-box with a click and throws the child a
penny.

\"You too must force your demand on the Divine Mother. She will come to
you without fail. I once said the same thing to some Sikhs when they
visited the temple at Dakshineswar. We were conversing in front of the
Kāli temple. They said, \'God is compassionate.\' \'Why compassionate?\'
I asked. They said, \'Why, revered sir, He constantly looks after us,
gives us righteousness and wealth, and provides us with our food.\'
\'Suppose\', I said, \'a man has children. Who will look after them and
provide them with food-their own father, or a man from another
village?\'

SUB-JUDGE: \"Is not God, then, compassionate, sir?\"

MASTER: \"Why should you think that? I just made a remark. What I mean
to say is that God is our very own. We can exert force on Him. With
one\'s own people one can even go so far as to say, \'You rascal! Won\'t
you give it to me?\'

**Futility of egotism**

(To the sub-judge) \"Let me ask you one thing. Are vanity and egotism
the result of knowledge or of

ignorance? Egotism is of the nature of tamas; it is begotten by
ignorance. On account of the barrier of ego one does not see God. \'All
troubles come to an end when the ego dies.\' It is futile to be
egotistic. Neither body nor wealth will last. Once a drunkard was
looking at the image of Durga. At the sight of Her decorations, he said,
\'Well, Mother! However You may fix Yourself up, after two or three days
they will drag You out and throw You into the Ganges.\' (All laugh.)

\"So I say to you all, you may be a judge or anybody else, but it is all
for two days only. Therefore you should give up vanity and pride.

**Sattva, rajas, and tamas**

\"The characteristics of sattva, rajas, and tamas are very different.
Egotism sleep, gluttony, lust, anger, and the like, are the traits of\'
people with tamas. Men with rajas entangle themselves in many
activities. Such a man has clothes all spick and span. His house is
immaculately clean. A portrait of the Queen hangs on a wall in his
drawing-room. When he worships God he wears a silk cloth. He has a
string of rudraksha beads around his neck, and in between the beads he
puts a few gold ones. When someone comes to visit the worship hall in
his house, he himself acts as guide. After showing the hall, he says to
the visitor: \'Please come this way, sir. There are other things too-the
floor of white marble and the natmandir with its exquisite carvings.\'
When he gives in charity he makes a show of it. But a man endowed with
sattva is quiet and peaceful. So far as dress is concerned, anything
will do. He earns only enough money to give his stomach the simplest of
food; he never flatters men to get money. His house is out of repair. He
never worries about his children\'s clothing. He does not hanker for
name and fame. His worship, charity, and meditation are all done in
secret; people do not know, about them at all. He meditates inside his
mosquito curtain. People think he doesn\'t sleep well at night and for
that reason sleeps late in the morning. Sattva is the last step of the
stairs; next is the roof. As soon as sattva is acquired there is no
further delay in attaining God. One step forward and God is realized.
(To the sub-judge) Didn\'t you say that all men were equal? Now you see
that there are so many varieties of human nature.

**Four classes of men**

\"There are still other classes and kinds of people. For instance, there
are those who are eternally free, those who have attained liberation,
those struggling for liberation, and those entangled in the world. So
many varieties of men! Sages like Nārada and Sukadeva are eternally
free. They are like a steamship, which not only crosses the ocean but
can carry big animals, even an elephant. Further, the soul that is
eternally free is like the superintendent of an estate. After bringing
one part of the estate under control, he goes to another. Those
struggling for liberation strive heart and soul to free themselves from
the net of the world. One or two of them may get out of the net. They
are called the liberated. The souls that are eternally free are like
clever fish; they are never caught in the net.

\"But the souls that are entangled, involved in worldliness, never come
to their senses. They lie in the net but are not even conscious that
they are entangled. If you speak of God before them, they at once leave
the place. They say: \'Why God now? We shall think of Him in the hour of
death.\' But when they lie on their death-beds, they say to their wives
or children: \'Why have you put so many wicks in the lamp? Use only one
wick. Otherwise too much oil will be burnt.\' While dying they think of
their wives and children, and weep, \'Alas! What will happen to them
after my death?\'

**The entangled soul**

\"The entangled souls repeat those very actions that make them suffer so
much. They are like the camel, which eats thorny bushes till the blood
streams from its mouth, but still will not give them up. Such a man may
have lost his son and be stricken with grief, but still he will have
children year after year. He may ruin himself by his daughter\'s
marriage, but still he will go on having daughters every year. And he
says: \'What can I do? It\'s just my luck!\' When he goes to a holy
place he doesn\'t have any time to think of God. He almost kills himself
carrying bundles for his wife. Entering the temple, he is very eager to
give his child the holy water to drink or make him roll on the floor;
but he has no time for his own devotions. These bound creatures slave
for their

masters to earn food for themselves and their families; and they earn
money by lying, cheating, flattery. They laugh at those who think of God
and meditate on Him, and call them lunatics.

\"So you see how many different kinds of men there are. You said that
all men were equal. But how many varieties of men there are! Some have
more power and some less.

**Thought of God at the hour of death**

\"The entangled creatures, attached to worldliness, talk only of worldly
things in the hour of death. What will it avail such men if they
outwardly repeat the name of God, take a bath in the Ganges, or visit
sacred places? If they cherish within themselves attachment to the
world, it must show up at the hour of death. While dying they rave
nonsense. Perhaps they cry out in a delirium, \'Turmeric powder!
Seasoning! Bay-leaf!\' The singing parrot, when at ease, repeats the
holy names of Radha and Krishna, but when it is seized by a cat it
utters its own natural sound; it squawks, \'Kaa! Kaa!\' It is said in
the Gitā that whatever one thinks in the hour of death, one becomes in
the after-life. King Bharata gave up his body exclaiming, \'Deer!
Deer!\' and was born as a deer in his next life. But if a man dies
thinking of God, then he attains God, and he does not have to come back
to the life of this world.\"

A BRAMO DEVOTEE: \"Sir, suppose a man has thought of God at other times
during his life, but at the time of his death forgets Him. Would he, on
that account, come back to this world of sorrow and suffering? Why
should it be so? He certainly thought of God some time during his
life.\"

MASTER: \"A man thinks of God, no doubt, but he has no faith in Him.
Again and again he forgets God and becomes attached to the world. It is
like giving the elephant a bath; afterwards he covers his body with mud
and dirt again. \'The mind is a mad elephant.\' But if you can make the
elephant go into the stable immediately after bathing him, then he stays
clean. Just so, if a man thinks of God in the hour of death, then his
mind becomes pure and it gets no more opportunity to become attached to
\'woman and gold\'.

\"Man has no faith in God. That is the reason he suffers so much. They
say that when you plunge into the holy waters of the Ganges your sins
perch on a tree on the bank. No sooner do you come out of the water
after the bath than the sins jump back on your shoulders. (All laugh.) A
man must prepare the way beforehand, so that he may think of God in the
hour of death. The way lies through constant practice. If a man
practises meditation on God, he will remember God even on the last day
of his life.\"

A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"You have spoken very beautifully, sir. Beautiful
words, indeed.\"

**Master\'s humility**

MASTER: \"Oh, this is just idle talk. But do you know my inner feeling?
I am the machine and God is the Operator. I am the house and He is the
Indweller. I am the engine and He is the Engineer. I am the chariot and
He is the Charioteer. I move as He moves me; I do as He makes me do.\"

Presently Trailokya began to sing to the accompaniment of drums and
cymbals. Sri Ramakrishna danced, intoxicated with divine love. Many
times he went into samādhi. He stood still, his eyes fixed, his face
beaming, with one hand on the shoulder of a beloved disciple. Coming
down a little from the state of ecstasy, he danced again like a mad
elephant. Regaining consciousness of the outer world, he improvised
lines to the music:

> *O Mother, dance about Thy devotees!*
>
> *Dance Thyself and make them dance as well.*
>
> *O Mother, dance in the lotus of my heart;*
>
> *Dance, O Thou the ever blessed Brahman!*
>
> *Dance in all Thy world-bewitching beauty.*

An indescribable scene. The exquisite and celestial dance of a child
completely filled with ecstatic love of God and identified heart and
soul with the Divine Mother! The Brahmo devotees danced around the
Master again and again, attracted like iron to a magnet. In ecstatic
voices they chanted the name of Brahman. Again, they

chanted the name of the Divine Mother. Many of them wept like children,
crying, \"Mother! Mother!\"

When the music was over, the devotees and the Master sat down. Although
it was about eight o\'clock, the evening worship of the Brahmo Samaj had
not yet begun. In the joy of this divine music they had forgotten all
about their formal worship. Vijay, who was to conduct the evening
service, sat facing the Master. His mother-in-law and the other Brahmo
ladies wanted to see Sri Ramakrishna; so the Master went to meet them in
another room.

After a time the Master came back and said to Vijay: \"What devotion to
God your mother-in-law has! About

the worldly life she said to me: \'Oh, you needn\'t tell me about the
world. No sooner does one wave disappear

than another rises up.\' \'But\', I said, \'what is that to you? You
have knowledge.\' She replied: \'Where is my knowledge? I haven\'t yet
been able to go beyond Vidyā-māyā and Avidyā-māyā. It won\'t help me
much to go beyond just the illusion of ignorance; I shall have to
transcend the illusion of knowledge as well. Only then shall I have true
knowledge of God. I am quoting your own words.\' \"

While they were talking, Beni Pāl, their host, entered the room.

BENI (to Vijay): \"Sir, please get up. It is already late. Please begin
the worship.\"

VIJAY; \"What further need is there of worship? I find that according to
your arrangement the rice pudding is served first, and then the soup and
other dishes.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \'The devotees provide offerings according to
their temperaments. The sattvic devotee offers the Deity simple rice
pudding, and the rajasic devotee, fifty different dishes. The tamasic
devotee slaughters goats and other animals.\"

Vijay began to hesitate about going to the platform to conduct the
worship. He said to the Master, \"I shall conduct the worship from the
platform only if you give me your blessing.\"

MASTER: \"It will be all right if you don\'t feel any egotism, if you
don\'t have the vain feeling: \'I am giving a lecture. Listen to me.\'
What begets egotism? Knowledge or ignorance? It is only the humble man
who attains Knowledge. In a low place rain-water collects. It runs down
from a mound.

\"A man achieves neither Knowledge nor liberation as long as he has
egotism. He comes back again and again to the world. The calf bellows,
\'Hamba! Hamba!\', that is, \'I! I!\' That is why it suffers such agony.
The butcher slaughters it and the shoe-maker makes shoes from its hide.
Besides, its hide is used for the drum, which is beaten mercilessly.
Still no end to its misery! At long last a carding machine is made from
its entrails. While carding the cotton the machine makes the sound
\'Tuhu! Tuhu!\', that is, \'Thou! Thou!\' Then the poor calf is released
from all suffering. It no longer says, \'Hamba! Hamba!\' but repeats,
\'Tuhu! Tuhu!\' The calf says, as it were, \'O God, Thou art the Doer
and I am nothing. Thou art the Operator and I am the machine. Thou art
everything.\'

\"Three words-\'master\', \'teacher\', and \'father\'-prick me like
thorns. I am the son of God, His eternal child. How can I be a
\'father\'? God alone is the Master and I am His instrument. He is the
Operator and I am the machine.

\"If somebody addresses me as guru, I say to him: \'Go away, you fool!
How can I be a teacher?\' There is no teacher except Satchidananda.
There is no refuge except Him. He alone is the Ferryman to take one
across the ocean of the world. (To Vijay) It is very difficult to act as
an Āchārya. It harms the Āchārya himself. Finding a number of men doing
him reverence, he sits you put four seers of milk in a one-seer jar? If
God, through His grace, ever reveals Himself to His devotee and makes
him understand, then he will know; but not otherwise.

> *\"That which is Brahman is Śakti, and That, again, is the Mother.*
>
> *He it is, says Ramprasad, that I approach as Mother;*
>
> *But must I give away the secret, here in the market-place? From the
> hints I have given, 0 mind, guess what that Being is!*

Ramprasad implies that he has known the truth of Brahman. He addresses
Brahman as Mother.

\"In another song Ramprasad expresses the same idea thus:

> *Knowing the secret that K āli is one with the highest Brahman, I have
> discarded, once for all, both dharma and adharma.*

Adharma means unrighteous actions, actions forbidden by religion. Dharma
means the pious actions prescribed by religion, as, for instance,
charity to the poor, feeding the brahmins, and so on.\"

VIJAY: \"What remains if one renounces both dharma and dharma?\"

MASTER: \"Pure love of God. I prayed to the Divine Mother: \'O Mother;
here, take Thy dharma; here, take Thy adharma; and give me pure love for
Thee. Here, take Thy virtue; here, take Thy vice; and give me pure love
for Thee. Here, take Thy knowledge; here, take Thy ignorance; and give
me pure love for Thee.\' You see, I didn\'t ask even for knowledge or
public recognition. When one renounces both dharma and adharma, there
remains only pure love of God-love that is stainless, motiveless, and
that one feels only for the sake of love.\"

A BRAMO DEVOTEE: \"Is God different from His Śakti?\"

MASTER: \"After attaining Perfect Knowledge one realizes that they are
not different. They are the same, like the gem and its brilliance.
Thinking of the gem, one cannot but think of its brilliance. Again, they
are like milk and its whiteness. Thinking of the one, you must also
think of the other. But you cannot realize this non-duality before the
attainment of Perfect Knowledge. Attaining Perfect Knowledge, one goes
into samādhi, beyond the twenty-four cosmic principles. Therefore the
principle of \'I\' does not exist in that stage. A man cannot describe
in words what he feels in samādhi.Coming down, he can give just a hint
about it. I come down a hundred cubits, as it were, when I say \'Om\'
after samādhi. Brahman is beyond the injunctions of the Vedas and cannot
be described. There neither \'I\' nor \'you\' exists.

\"As long as a man is conscious of \'I\' and \'you\', and as long as he
feels that it is he who prays or meditates, so long will he feel that
God is listening to his prayer and that God is a Person. Then he must
say: \'O God, Thou art the Master and I am Thy servant. Thou art the
whole and I am a part of Thee. Thou art the Mother and I am Thy child.\'
At that time there exists a feeling of difference: \'I am one and Thou
art another.\' It is God Himself who makes us feel this difference; and
on account of this difference one sees man and woman, light and
darkness, and so on. As long as one is aware of this difference, one
must accept Śakti, the Personal God. It is God who has put
\'I-consciousness\' in us. You may reason a thousand times; still this
\'I\' does not disappear. As long as \'I-consciousness\' exists, God
reveals Himself to us as a Person.

\"Therefore, as long as a man is conscious of \'I\' and of
differentiation, he cannot speak of the attributeless Brahman and must
accept Brahman with attributes. This Brahman with attributes has been
declared in the Vedas, the Puranas, and the Tantra, to be Kāli, the
Primal Energy.\"

**Way to Brahmajnana**

VIJAY: \"How, sir, can one have the vision of the Primal Energy and
attain Brahmajnana, the Knowledge of the attributeless Brahman?\"

MASTER: \"Pray to Him with a yearning heart, and weep. That will purify
your heart. You see the reflection of the sun in clear water. In the
mirror of his \'I-consciousness\' the devotee sees the form of the
Primal Energy, Brahman with attributes. But the mirror must be wiped
clean. One does not see the right reflection if there is any dirt on the
mirror.

\"As long as a man must see the Sun in the water of his
\'I-consciousness\' and has no other means of seeing It,

as long as he has no means of seeing the real Sun except through Its
reflection, so long is the reflected sun alone one hundred per cent real
to him. As long as the \'I\' is real, so long is the reflected sun
real-one hundred per cent real. That reflected sun is nothing but the
Primal Energy.

\"But if you seek Brahmajnana, the Knowledge of the attributeless
Brahman, then proceed to the real Sun through Its reflection. Pray to
Brahman with attributes, who listens to your prayers, and He Himself
will give you full Knowledge of Brahman; for that which is Brahman with
attributes is verily Brahman without attributes, that which is Brahman
is verily Śakti. One realizes this non-duality after the attainment of
Perfect Knowledge.

\"The Divine Mother gives Her devotee Brahmajnana too. But a true lover
of God generally does not seek the Knowledge of Brahman.

\"There is another path, the path of knowledge, which is very difficult.
You members of the Brahmo Samaj are not jnanis. You are bhaktas. The
Jnāni believes that Brahman alone is real and the world illusory as a
dream. To him, \'I\' and \'you\' are illusory as a dream.

\"God is our Inner Controller. Pray to Him with a pure and guileless
heart. He will explain everything to you. Give up egotism and take
refuge in Him. You will realize everything.\"

The Master sang:

> *Dwell, O mind, within yourself;*
>
> *Enter no other\'s home.*
>
> *If you but seek there, you will find*
>
> *All you are searching for.*
>
> *God, the true Philosopher\'s Stone,*
>
> *Who answers every prayer,*
>
> *Lies hidden deep within your heart,*
>
> *The richest gem of all.*
>
> *How many pearls and precious stones*
>
> *Are scattered all about*
>
> *The outer court that lies before*
>
> *The chamber of your heart!*

He continued: \"When you mix with people outside your Samaj, love them
all. When in their company be one of them. Don\'t harbour malice toward
them. Don\'t turn up your nose in hatred and say: \'Oh, this man
believes in God with form and not in the formless God. That man believes
in the formless God and not in God with form. This man is a Christian.
This man is a Hindu. And this man is a Musslman.\' It is God alone who
makes people see things in different ways. Know that people have
different natures. Realize this and mix with them as much as you can.
And love all. But enter your own inner chamber to enjoy peace and bliss.

> *Lighting the lamp of Knowledge in the chamber of your heart, Behold
> the face of the Mother, Brahman\'s Embodiment.*

You can see your true Self only within your own chamber. The cowherds
take the cows to graze in the pasture. There the cattle mix. They all
form one herd. But on returning to their sheds in the evening they are
separated. Then each stays by itself in its own stall. Therefore I say,
dwell by yourself in your own chamber.\"

It was ten o\'clock in the evening. The Master got into a carriage to
return to Dakshineswar. One or two attending devotees got in with him.
The carriage stood under a tree, in deep darkness. Beni Pāl wanted to
send some sweets and other food with Sri Ramakrishna for Ramlal, the
Master\'s nephew.

BENI PĀL: \"Sir, Ramlal was not here this evening. With your permission
I should like to send some sweets for him by your attendants.\"

MASTER (with great anxiety): \"Oh, Beni Pāl! Oh, sir! Please don\'t send
these things with me. That will do me harm. It is never possible for me
to lay up anything. I hope you won\'t mind.\"

BENI PĀL: \"As you please, sir. Please give me your blessing.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, we have been very happy today! You see, he alone is a true
man who has made money his servant. But those who do not know the use of
money are not men even though they have human forms. They may have human
bodies, but they behave like animals. You are blessed indeed. You have
made so many devotees happy today.\"

**Monday, October 20, 1884**

Two days after the worship of Kāli, the Mārwāris of the Burrabazar
section of Calcutta were celebrating the Annakuta festival. Sri
Ramakrishna had been invited by the Mārwāri devotees to the ceremony at
12 Mallick Street. It was the second day of the bright fortnight of the
moon. The festival connected with the worship of Kāli, known as the
\"Festival of Light\", was still going on at Burra bazar.

About three o\'clock in the afternoon M. and the younger Gopal came to
Burrabazar. M. had in his hand a bundle of cloths he had purchased for
Sri Ramakrishna. Mallick Street was jammed with people, bullock-carts,
and carriages. As M. and Gopal approached Mallick Street they noticed
Sri Ramakrishna in a carriage, which could hardly move because of the
jam. Baburam and Ram Chakravarty were with the Master. He smiled at M.
and Gopal.

Sri Ramakrishna alighted from the carriage. With Baburam he proceeded on
foot to the house of his host, M. leading the way. They saw the
courtyard of the house filled with big bales of clothes which were being
loaded into bullock-carts for shipment. The Mārwāri host greeted the
Master and led him to the third floor of the house. A painting of Kāli
hung on the wall. Sri Ramakrishna bowed before it. He sat down and
became engaged in conversation with the devotees. One of the Mārwāris
began to stroke his feet. The Master asked him to stop. After reflecting
a minute he said, \"All right, you can stroke them a little.\" His words
were full of compassion.

MASTER (to M.): \"What about your school?\"

M: \"Today is a holiday, sir.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Tomorrow there will be a musical recital of the
Chandi at Adhar\'s house.\"

**Master and the Mārwāri pundit**

The host sent a pundit to Sri Ramakrishna. He saluted the Master and
took a seat. Soon they were engaged in conversation. They talked about
spiritual things.

MASTER: \"God incarnates Himself for the bhakta and not for the Jnāni.\"

PUNDIT: \" \'I incarnate Myself in every age for the protection of the
good, for the destruction of the wicked, and for the establishment of
dharma.\' God becomes man, first, for the joy of the bhakta, and
secondly, for the destruction of the wicked. The Jnāni has no desire.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"But I have not got rid of all desires. I have the
desire for love of God.\" The pundit\'s son entered the room. He saluted
the Master and took a seat.

MASTER (to the pundit): \"Well, what is bhava and what is bhakti?\"

PUNDIT: \"Meditation on God mellows the mind. This mellowness is called
bhava. It is like the thawing of ice when the sun rises.\"

MASTER: \"Well, what is prema?\"

The pundit and Sri Ramakrishna were talking in Hindusthani. The former
gave some sort of explanation of prema.

MASTER (to the pundit): \"No! No! That is not the meaning. Prema means
such love for God that it makes a man forget the world and also his
body, which is so dear to him. Chaitanyadeva had prema.\"

PUNDIT: \"Yes, sir. One behaves like a drunkard.\"

MASTER: \"Some people develop bhakti and others do not; how do you
explain that, sir?\"

PUNDIT: \"There is no partiality in God. He is the Wish-fulfilling Tree.
Whatever a man asks of God he gets. But he must go near the Tree to ask
the boon.\"

The pundit said all this in Hindusthani. The Master explained it to M.in
Bengali.

**Different kinds of samādhi**

MASTER: \"Sir, please describe samādhi to us.\"

PUNDIT: \"There are two kinds of samādhi: savikalpa and nirvikalpa. In
nirvikalpa samādhi the functioning of the mind stops altogether.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. The mind completely takes the form of Reality. The
distinction between the meditator and the object of meditation does not
exist. There are two other kinds of samādhi: chetana and jada. Nārada
and Sukadeva attained chetana samādhi. Isn\'t that true, sir?\"

PUNDIT: \"Yes, sir, that is so.\"

MASTER: \"Further, there are the unmana samādhi and the sthita samādhi.
Isn\'t that true, sir?\"

The pundit remained silent. He did not venture an opinion.

MASTER: \"Well, sir, through the practice of japa and austerity one can
get occult powers, such as walking on the water of the Ganges. Isn\'t
that true?\"

PUNDIT: \"Yes, one can. But a devotee doesn\'t want them.\" The
conversation continued for some time. The pundit said he would visit the
Master at Dakshineswar the next ekadasi day.

MASTER: \"Ah! Your boy is very nice.\"

PUNDIT: \"Well, revered sir, all this is transitory. It is like the
waves in a river-one goes down and another comes up.\"

MASTER: \"You have substance in you.\"

After a few minutes the pundit saluted Sri Ramakrishna. He said: \"I
shall have to perform my daily devotions. Please let me go.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, sit down! Sit down!\"

The pundit sat down again. The conversation turned to hathayoga. The
pundit discussed the subject with the Master in Hindusthani. Sri
Ramakrishna said: \"Yes, that is also a form of austerity. But the
hathayogi identifies himself with his body. His mind dwells on his body
alone.\" The pundit took leave of the Master. Sri Ramakrishna conversed
with the pundit\'s son.

MASTER: \"One can understand the Bhagavata well if one has already
studied the Nyaya, the Vedānta , and the

other systems of philosophy. Isn\'t that so?\"

PUNDIT\'S SON: \"Yes, sir. It is very necessary to study the Samkhya
philosophy.\"

The conversation went on. Sri Ramakrishna was leaning against a big
pillow; the devotees were sitting on the floor. Lying in that position,
the Master began to sing:

> *Brother, joyfully cling to God;*
>
> *Thus striving, some day you may attain Him.*

Their host entered the room and saluted Sri Ramakrishna. He was a pious
man and devoted to the Master. The pundit\'s son was still there. The
Master asked if the Panini, the Sanskrit grammar, was taught in the
schools. He further asked about the Nyaya and the Vedānta philosophies.
The host did not show much interest in the discussion and changed the
subject.

HOST: \"Revered sir, what is the way for us?\"

MASTER: \"Chanting the name and glories of God, living in the company of
holy men, and earnestly praying to God.\"

HOST: \"Please bless me, sir, that I may pay less and less attention to
worldly things.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"How much attention do you give to the world? Fifty
per cent?\" (Laughter.)

HOST: \"You know that, sir. We cannot achieve anything without the grace
of a holy person like yourself.\"

MASTER: \"If you please God, everyone will be pleased. It is God alone
that exists in the heart of the holy man.\"

HOST: \"Nothing, of course, remains unrealized when one attains God. If
a man attains God, he can give up everything else. If a man gets a
rupee, he gives up the joy of a penny.\"

MASTER: \"A little spiritual discipline is necessary. Through the
practice of discipline one gradually obtains divine joy. Suppose a jar
with money inside is hidden deep under the earth and someone wants to
possess it. In that case he must take the trouble of digging for it. As
he digs, he perspires. After much digging the spade strikes the metal
jar. He feels a thrill at the sound. The more sound the spade makes,
striking against the jar, the more joy he feels. \"Pray to Rāma.
Meditate on Him. He will certainly provide you with everything.\"

HOST: \"Revered sir, you are Rāma Himself.\"

MASTER: \"How is that? The waves belong to the river; does the river
belong to the waves?\"

HOST: \"Rāma dwells only in the hearts of holy men. He cannot be seen in
any other way. There is no Incarnation of God at the present time.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"How do you know there is no Divine Incarnation?\"

The host remained silent.

MASTER: \"All cannot recognize an Incarnation. When Nārada visited Rāma,
Rāma prostrated Himself before

Nārada and said: \'We are worldly creatures. How can we be sanctified
unless holy men like you visit us?\' Further, Rāma went into exile in
the forest to redeem His father\'s pledges. He saw that, since hearing
of His exile, the rishis of the forest had been fasting. Many of them
did not know that Rāma was none other than the Supreme Brahman.\"

HOST: \"You too are that same Rāma.\"

*Ārati*

MASTER: \"For heaven\'s sake! Never say that.\"

As, Sri Ramakrishna spoke these words, he bowed down to the host and
said, with folded hands: \" \'That Rāma dwells in all beings; He exists
everywhere in the universe. \"I am your servant. It is Rāma Himself who
has become all men, animals, and other living beings.\"

HOST: \"But sir, we do not know that.\"

MASTER: \"Whether you know it or not, you are Rāma.\"

HOST: \"You are free from love and hatred.\"

MASTER: \"How so? I engaged a carriage to bring me to Calcutta and
advanced the coachman three *ānnās*. But he didn\'t turn up. I became
very angry with him. He is a very wicked man. He made me suffer a lot.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was resting. The Mārwāri devotees had been singing
bhajan on the roof. They were celebrating the Krishna festival.
Arrangements had been made for worship and food offering. At the host\'s
request the Master went to see the image. He bowed down before the
Deity.

Sri Ramakrishna was profoundly moved as he stood before the image. With
folded hands he said: \"O Govinda, Thou art my soul! Thou art my life!
Victory to Govinda! Hallowed be the name of Govinda! Thou art the
Embodiment of Satchidananda! Oh, Krishna! Ah, Krishna! Krishna is
knowledge. Krishna is mind. Krishna is life. Krishna is soul. Krishna is
body. Krishna is caste. Krishna is family. O Govinda, my life and
soul!\"

Uttering these words,\" Sri Ramakrishna went into samādhi. He remained
standing. Ram Chatterji supported him.

After a long time the Master regained consciousness of the world. The
Mārwāri devotees were about to take out the image. The offering of food
was to take place outside the room. The Master joined the procession of

devotees. The food was offered with and music. Sri Ramakrishna fanned
the image.

Then began the ceremony of feeding the brahmins. They were seated on the
roof. The Master and his devotees also partook of the prasad.

Sri Ramakrishna took leave of the host. It was evening and the street
was jammed as before with people and vehicles. He said: \"Let us get out
of the carriage. It can go by a back street.\" Proceeding on foot, he
found that a betel-leaf seller had opened his stall in front of a small
room that looked like a hole. One could not possibly enter it without
bending one\'s head. The Master said: \"How painful it is to be shut in
such a small space! That is the way of worldly people. And they are
happy in such a life.\"

The carriage came up after making the detour. The Master entered it with
Baburam, M., and Ram Chatterji.

The younger Gopal sat on the roof of the carriage.

A beggar woman with a baby on her arm stood in front of the carriage
waiting for alms. The Master said to M., \"Have you any money?\" Gopal
gave her something.

The carriage rolled along Burra bazar. Everywhere there were signs of
great festivity. The night was dark but illuminated with myriads of
lights. The carriage came to the Chitpur road, which was also brightly
lighted. The people moved in lines like ants. The crowd looked at the
gaily decorated stores and stalls on both sides of the road. There were
sweetmeat store and perfume stalls. Pictures, beautiful and gaudy, hung
from the walls. Well-dressed shopkeepers sprayed the visitors with
rose-water. The carriage stopped in front of a perfume stall. The Master
looked at the pictures and lights and felt happy like a child. People
were talking loudly. He cried out; \"Go forward! Move on!\" He laughed.
He said to Baburam with a loud laugh: \"Move on! What are you doing?\"
The devotees laughed too. They understood that the Master wanted them to
move forward to God and

not to be satisfied with their present state.

The carriage drove on. The Master noticed that M. had brought some
cloths for him. M. had with him two pieces of unbleached and two pieces
of washed cloth. But the Master had asked him only for the unbleached
ones. He said to M.: \"Give me the unbleached ones. You may keep the
others. All right. You may give me one of them.\"

1.  \"Then shall I take back one piece?\" MASTER: \"Then take both.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"As you please, sir.\"

MASTER: \"You can give me those when I need them. You see, yesterday
Beni Pāl wanted me to carry away some food for Ramlal. I told him I
couldn\'t. It is impossible for me to lay up for the future.\"

M: \'That\'s all right, sir. I shall take back the two pieces of washed
cloth.\"

MASTER (tenderly): \"Don\'t you see, if any desire arises in my mind, it
is for the good of you all? You are my own. I shall tell you if I need
anything.\"

M. (humbly): \"Yes, sir.\"

Referring to a devotee, Sri Ramakrishna said: \"I said to him yesterday,
\'Tomorrow I shall go to Burra bazar;

please meet me there.\' Do you know what he said? He said: The tram fare
will be one *ānnā*. Where shall I get it?\' He had been to Beni Pāl\'s
garden yesterday and had officiated there as priest. No one had asked
him to do it. He had put on the show himself. He wanted people to know
that he was a member of the Brahmo Samaj. (To M.) Can you tell me what
he meant when he said that the tram would cost him one *ānnā*?\"

The conversation turned to the Annakuta festival of the Mārwāris.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"What you have seen here one sees at
Vrindāvan too. Rākhāl has been seeing the same thing there. But the
mound of food at Vrindāvan is higher, and more people gather there.
There you also see the Govardhan hill. That\'s the only difference.

\"Did you notice the Mārwāris\' devotion? That is the real Hindu ideal.
That is the Sanatana Dharma. Did you notice their joy when they carried
the image in procession? They were happy to think that they bore the
throne of God on their shoulders.

\"The Hindu religion alone is the Sanatana Dharma. The various creeds
you hear of nowadays have come into existence through the will of God
and will disappear again through His will. They will not last forever.
Therefore I say, \'I bow down at the feet of even the modern devotees.\'
The Hindu religion has always existed and will always exist.\"

M. was going home. He saluted the Master and got out of the carriage
near Sobha bazar. Sri Ramakrishna proceeded to Dakshineswar in a happy
mood.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 33**

WITH VARIOUS DEVOTEES

> Sunday, October 26, 1884

IT WAS AFTERNOON, and many devotees were present in the Master\'s room.
Among them were Manomohan,

Mahimacharan, and M. They were joined later by Ishan and Hazra. Balarām
and Rākhāl were still staying at

Vrindāvan. The many young boys who at this time began to seek the
Master\'s company later became his

intimate disciples. Lātu lived with the Master, and Jogin, who lived in
the village, was a frequent visitor.

Sri Ramakrishna, happy child of the Divine Mother that he was, radiated
a joy and peace that were reflected in the hearts of his devotees and
found expression in their happy faces. They were seated on the floor and
had their eyes fixed on the Master, who was standing in a pensive mood,
like a boy.

**God in all beings**

MASTER (to Manomohan): \"I see Rāma in all things. You are all sitting
here, but I see only Rāma in everyone of you.\"

MANOMOHAN: \"Yes, sir. It is Rāma who has become everything. But, as you
say, though all water is Narayana, yet some water is fit for drinking,
some for washing the hands and face, and some only for cleaning pots and
pans.\"

MASTER: \"It is true. But I see that it is God Himself who has become
everything-the universe and its living beings.\"

Presently the Master sat down on the small couch near his bed.

MASTER (to Mahimacharan): \"There is no question of my being truthful;
but must I develop a mania for it? If I once say that I shall not eat,
then it is impossible for me to eat, even if I am hungry. Again, if I
ask a particular man to take my water-jug to the pine-grove, he alone
must carry it. If another man carries it, he will have to take it back.
What a fix I am in! Is there no way out of it?

\"Besides, I can\'t carry anything with me, neither food nor betel-leaf;
for that means laying up for the future. I can\'t carry a little clay in
my hand.\"

Just then a man entered the room and told the Master that Hriday was
waiting to see him in Jadu Mallick\'s garden, near the gate.

The Master said to the devotees: \"I shall have to see Hriday. Please
don\'t leave the room.\" He put on his slippers and went toward the east
gate of the temple garden, M. accompanying him. The road through the
garden was covered with red brick-dust. The manager of the temple, who
was standing on the road, saluted Sri Ramakrishna. The Master passed the
north entrance of the temple compound, where the bearded sentries sat.
On his left he passed the kuthi, the building used by the proprietors of
the temple. Then he walked on down the road which was lined on both
sides with flowering trees, passing the reservoir on his right, and went
outside the temple garden. He found Hriday waiting for him near the gate
of Jadu Mallick\'s garden.

**God in all beings**

At the sight of the Master, Hriday, who had been standing there with
folded hands, prostrated himself before him. When the Master told him to
get up, he rose and began to cry like a child. How strange! Tears also
appeared in the Master\'s eyes. He wiped them away with his hands.
Hriday had made him suffer endless agonies, yet the Master wept for him.

MASTER: \"Why are you here now?\"

HRIDAY (weeping): \"I have come to see you. To whom else shall I tell my
sorrows?\"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled and said to him by way of consolation: \"One
cannot avoid such sorrows in the world.

Pleasure and pain are inevitable in worldly life. (Pointing to M.) That
is why they come here now and then.

They get peace of mind by hearing about God. What is your trouble?\"

HRIDAY (weeping): \"I am deprived of your company and so I suffer.\"

MASTER: \"Why, was it not you who said to me, \'You follow your ideal
and let me follow mine\'?\"

HRIDAY: \"Yes, I did say that. But what did I know?\"

MASTER: \"I shall say good-bye to you now. Come another day and we shall
talk together. Today is Sunday and many people have come to see me. They
are waiting in my room. Have you had a good crop in the country?\"

HRIDAY: \'It isn\'t bad.\"

MASTER: \"Let me say good-bye. Come another day.\"

Hriday again prostrated himself before the Master, who started back to
his room with M.

MASTER (to M.): \"He tormented me as much as he served me. When my
stomach trouble had reduced my

body to a couple of bones and I couldn\'t eat anything, he said to me
one day: \'Look at me-how well I eat! You\'ve just taken a fancy that
you can\'t eat.\' Again he said: \'You are a fool! If I weren\'t living
with you, where would your profession of holiness be?\' One day he
tormented me so much that I stood on the embankment ready to give up my
body by jumping into the Ganges, which was then at flood-tide.\"

M. became speechless at these words of the Master. For such a man he had
shed tears a few minutes before!

MASTER (to M.): \"Well, he served me a great deal; then why should he
have fallen on such evil days? He took care of me like a parent bringing
up a child. As for me, I would remain unconscious of the world day and
night. Besides, I was ill for a long time. I was completely at his
mercy.\"

M. did not know how to answer Sri Ramakrishna; so he kept silent.

Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room and sat On the small couch. The
devotees had been waiting for him eagerly. Several devotees from
Konnagar had arrived. One of them came forward to question the Master.

**Bhava and Mahabhava**

DEVOTEE: \"Sir, we hear that you go into samādhi and experience ecstasy.
Please explain why and how you get into that mood.\"

MASTER: \"Sri Radha used to experience Mahabhava. If any of her
companions wanted to touch her while she was in that state, another of
them would say: \'Please do not touch that body, the playground of Sri
Krishna. Krishna is now sporting in her body.\' It is not possible to
experience bhava or mahabhava without the realization of God. When a
fish comes up from a great depth, you see a movement on the surface of
the water; and if it is a big one there is much splashing about. That is
why a devotee \'laughs and weeps and dances and sings in the ecstasy of
God\'.

\"One cannot remain in bhava very long. People take a man to be crazy if
he sits before a mirror and looks at his face all the time.\"

**Discipline for God-vision**

DEVOTEE: \"Sir, we hear that you see God. If you do, please show Him to
us.\"

MASTER: \"Everything depends on God\'s will. What can a man do? While
chanting God\'s name, sometimes tears flow and at other times the eyes
remain dry. While meditating on God, some days I feel a great deal of
inner awakening, and some days I feel nothing.

\"A man must work. Only then can he see God. One day, in an exalted
mood, I had a vision of the Haldārpukur. I saw a low-caste villager
drawing water after pushing aside the green scum. Now and then he took
up the water in the palm of his hand and examined it. In that vision it
was revealed to me that the water cannot be seen without pushing aside
the green scum that covers it; that is to say, one cannot develop love
of God or obtain His vision without work. Work means meditation, japa,
and the like. The chanting of God\'s name and glories is work too. You
may also include charity, sacrifice, and so on.

\"If you want butter, you must let the milk turn to curd. It must be
left in a quiet place. When the milk becomes curd, you must work hard to
churn it. Only then can you get butter from the milk.\"

**Futility of mere study**

MAHIMACHARAN: \"That is true, sir. Work is certainly necessary. One must
labour hard. Only then does one succeed. There is so much to read! The
scriptures are endless.\"

MASTER (to Mahimacharan): \"How much of the scriptures can you read?
What will you gain by mere reasoning? Try to realize God before anything
else. Have faith in the guru\'s words, and work. If you have no guru,
then pray to God with a longing heart. He will let you know what He is
like.

\"What will you learn of God from books? As long as you are at a
distance from the market-place you hear only an indistinct roar. But it
is quite different when you are actually there. Then you hear and see
everything distinctly. You hear people saying: \'Here are your potatoes.
Take them and give me the money.\' \"From a distance you hear only the
rumbling noise of the ocean. Go near it and you will see many boats
sailing about, birds flying, and waves rolling.

\"One cannot get true feeling about God from the study of books. This
feeling is something very different from book-learning. Books,
scriptures, and science appear as mere dirt and straw after the
realization of God.

\"The one thing needful is to be introduced to the master of the house.
Why are you so anxious to know beforehand how many houses and gardens,
and how many government securities, the master possesses? The servants
of the house would not allow you even to approach these, and they would
certainly not tell you about their master\'s investments. Therefore,
somehow or other become acquainted with the master, even if you have to
jump over the fence or take a few pushes from the servants. Then the
master himself will tell you all about his houses and gardens and his
government securities. And what is more, the servants and the
door-keeper will salute you when you are known to the master.\' (All
laugh.)

**Yearning for God**

DEVOTEE: \"Now the question is how to become acquainted with the
master.\" (Laughter.)

MASTER: \"That is why I say that work is necessary. It will not do to
say that God exists and then idle away your time. You must reach God
somehow or other. Call on Him in solitude and pray to Him, \'O Lord!
reveal Thyself to me.\' Weep for Him with a longing heart. You roam
about in search of \'woman and gold\' like a madman; now be a little mad
for God. Let people say, \'This man has lost his head for God.\' Why not
renounce everything for a few days and call on God in solitude?

**Work hard for His realization**

\"What will you achieve by simply saying that God exists and doing
nothing about it? There are big fish in the Haldārpukur; but can you
catch them by merely sitting idly on the bank? Prepare some spiced bait
and throw it into the lake. Then the fish will come from the deep water
and you will see ripples. That will make you happy. Perhaps a fish will
jump with a splash and you will get a glimpse of it. Then you will be so
glad!

\"Milk must be turned to curd and the curd must be churned. Only then
will you get butter. (To Mahima) What a nuisance! Someone must show God
to a man, while he himself sits idly by all the while! Someone must
extract the butter and hold it in front of his mouth! (All laugh.) What
a bother! Someone else must catch the fish and give it to him!

\"A man wanted to see the king. The king lived in the inner court of the
palace, beyond seven gates. No sooner did the man pass the first gate
than he exclaimed, \'Oh, where is the king?\' But there were seven
gates, and he must pass them one after another before he could see the
king.\"

MAHIMACHARAN: \"By what kind of work can one realize God?\"

MASTER: \"It is not that God can be realized by this work and not by
that. The vision of God depends on His grace. Still a man must work a
little with longing for God in his heart. If he has longing he will
receive the grace of God.

**Favourable conditions for realization of God**

\"To attain God a man must have certain favourable conditions: the
company of holy men, discrimination, and the blessings of a real
teacher. Perhaps his elder brother takes the responsibility for the
family; perhaps his wife has spiritual qualities and is very virtuous;
perhaps he is not married at all or entangled in worldly life. He
succeeds when conditions like these are fulfilled.

\"In a certain family a man lay seriously ill. He was at the point of
death. Someone said: \'Here is a remedy: First it must rain when the
star Svati is in the ascendant; then some of that rain-water must
collect in a human skull; then a frog must come there and a snake must
chase it; and as the frog is about to be bitten by the snake, it must
jump away and the poison of the snake must drop into the skull. You must
prepare a medicine from this poison and give it to the patient. Then he
will live.\' The head of the family consulted the almanac about the star
and set out at the right moment. With great longing of heart he began to
search for the different ingredients. He prayed to God, \'O Lord, I
shall succeed only if You bring together all the ingredients.\' As he
was roaming about he actually saw a skull lying on the ground. Presently
there came a shower of rain. Then the man exclaimed: \'O gracious Lord,
I have got the rain-water under Svati, and the skull too. What is more,
some of the rain has fallen into the skull. Now be kind enough to bring
together the other ingredients.\' He was reflecting with a yearning
heart when he saw a poisonous snake approaching. His joy knew no bounds.
He became so excited that he could feel the thumping of his own heart.
\'O God,\' he prayed, \'now the snake has come too. I have procured most
of the ingredients. Please be gracious and give me the remaining ones.\'
No sooner did he pray thus than a frog hopped up. The snake pursued it.
As they came near the skull and the snake was about to bite the frog,
the frog jumped over the skull and the snake\'s poison fell into it. The
man began to dance, clapping his hands for joy. So I say that one gets
everything through yearning.

\"A man cannot realize God unless he renounces everything mentally. A
sādhu cannot lay things up. \'Birds and wandering monks do not make
provision for the morrow.\' Such is the state of my mind that I cannot
carry even clay in my hand. Once, when Hriday tormented me, I thought of
leaving this place and going to Benares. I thought of taking some
clothes with me. But how could I take money? So I could not go to
Benares. (All laugh.)

(To Mahima) \"You are a householder. Therefore you should hold bothto
\'this\' and to \'that\'-both to the world and to God.\"

MAHlMA: \"Sir, can one who holds to \'that\' also hold to \'this\'?\"

MASTER: \"Once, sitting on the bank of the Ganges neat the Panchavati,
holding a rupee in one hand and clay in the other, I discriminated,
\'The rupee is the clay-the clay is verily the rupee, and the rupee is
verily the clay\', and then threw the rupee into the river. But I was a
little frightened. \'How foolish of me to offend the goddess of
fortune!\' I thought. \'What shall I do if she doesn\'t provide me with
food any more?\' Then, like

Hazra, I sought help in a ruse. I said to the goddess, \'Mother, may you
dwell in my heart.\' Once the Divine Mother was pleased with a man\'s
austerities and said to him, \'You may ask a favour of Me.\' \'O
Mother,\' said he, \'if You are so pleased. with me, then grant that I
may eat from a gold plate with my grandchildren.\' Now, in one boon the
man got everything: grandchildren, wealth, and gold plate. (All laugh.)

\"When the mind is freed from \'woman and gold\', it can be directed to
God and become absorbed in Him. It is the bound alone who can be freed.

The moment the mind \'turns away from God, it is bound. When does the
lower needle of a pair of scales move away from the upper one? When one
pan is pressed down by a weight. \'Woman and gold\' is the weight.

\"Why does a child cry on coming out of its mother\'s womb? With its cry
it says, as it were: \'Just see where I am now! In my mother\'s womb I
was meditating on the Lotus Feet of God; but see where I am now!\'

(To Mahima) \"You should renounce mentally. Live the life of a house
holder in a spirit of detachment.\"

MAHIMA: \"Can a man live in the world if his mind is once directed to
God?\"

**See God in the world**

MASTER: \"Why not? Where will he go away from the world? I realize that
wherever I live I am always in the Ayodhya of Rāma. This whole world is
Rāma\'s Ayodhya. After receiving instruction from His teacher, Rāma said
that He would renounce the world. Daśaratha sent the sage Vasishtha to
Rāma to dissuade Him. Vasishtha found Him filled with intense
renunciation. He said to Rāma: \'First of all, reason with me, Rāma;
then You may leave the world. May I ask You if this world is outside,
God? If that is so, then You may give it up.\' Rāma found that it is God
alone who has become the universe and all its living beings. Everything
in the world appears real on account of God\'s reality behind it.
Thereupon Rāma became silent.

\"In the world a man must fight against passions like lust and anger,
against many desires, against attachment. It is convenient to fight from
inside a fort-from his own home. At home he gets his food and other help
from his wife. In the Kaliyuga the life of a man depends entirely on
food. It is better to get food at one place than to knock at seven doors
for it. Living at home is like facing the battle from a fort.

\"Live in the world like a cast-off leaf in a gale. Such a leaf is
sometimes blown inside a house and sometimes to a rubbish heap. The leaf
goes wherever the wind blows-sometimes to a good place and sometimes to
a bad. Now God has put you in the world. That is good. Stay here. Again,
when He lifts you from here and puts you in a better place, that will be
time enough to think about what to do then.

\"God has put you in the world. What can you do about it? Resign
everything to Him. Surrender yourself at His feet. Then there will be no
more confusion. Then you will realize that it is God who does
everything. All depends on \'the will of Rāma\'.\"

**Story of \"the will of Rāma\"**

A DEVOTEE: \"What is that story about \'the will of Rāma\'?\"

MASTER: \"In a certain village there lived a weaver. He was a very
pious,soul. Everyone trusted him and loved him. He used to sell his
goods in the market-place. When a customer asked him the price of a
piece of cloth, the weaver would say: \'By the will of Rāma the price of
the yarn is one rupee and the labour four *ānnās* ; by the will of Rāma
the profit is two *ānnās* . The price of the cloth, by the will of Rāma,
is one rupee and six *ānnās* .\' Such was the people\'s faith in the
weaver that the customer would at once pay the price and take the cloth.
The weaver was a real devotee of God. After finishing his supper in the
evening, he would spend long hours\' in the worship hall meditating on
God and chanting His name and glories. Now, late one night the weaver
couldn\'t get to sleep. He was sitting in the worship hall, smoking now
and then, when a band of robbers happened to pass that way. They wanted
a man to carry their goods and said to the weaver, \'Come with us.\' So
saying, they led him off by the hand. After committing a robbery in a
house, they put a load of

things on the weaver\'s head, commanding him to carry them. Suddenly the
police arrived and the robbers ran away. But the weaver, with his load,
was arrested. He was kept in the lock-up for the night. Next day he was
brought before the magistrate for trial. The villagers learnt what had
happened and came to court. They said to the magistrate, \'Your Honour,
this man could never commit a robbery.\' Thereupon the magistrate asked
the weaver to make his statement.

\'The weaver said: \'Your Honour, by the will of Rāma I finished my meal
at night. Then by the will of Rāma I was sitting in the worship hall. It
was quite late at night by the will of Rāma. By the will of Rāma I had
been thinking of God and chanting His name and glories, when by the will
of Rāma a band of robbers passed that way. By the will of Rāma they
dragged me with them; by the will of Rāma they committed a robbery in a
house; and by the will of Rāma they put a load on my head. Just then, by
the will of Rāma the police arrived, and by the will of Rāma I was
arrested. Then by the will of Rāma the police kept me in the lock-up for
the night, and this morning by the will of Rāma I have been brought
before Your Honour.\' The magistrate realized that the weaver was a
pious man and ordered his release. On his way home the weaver said to
his friends, \'By the will of Rāma I have been released.\'

\"Whether a man should be a householder or a monk depends on the will of
Rāma. Surrender everything to God and do your duties in the world. What
else can you do? A clerk was once sent to prison. After the prison term
was over he was released. Now, what do you think he did? Cut capers or
do his old clerical work?

\"If the householder becomes a jivanmukta, then he can easily live in
the world if he likes. A man who has attained Knowledge does not
differentiate between \'this place\' and \'that place\'. All places are
the same to him. He who thinks of \'that place\' also thinks of \'this
place\'.

**Master\'s first meeting with Keshab**

\"When I first met Keshab at Jaygopal\'s garden house, I remarked, \'He
is the only one who has dropped his tail.\' At this people laughed.
Keshab said to them: \'Don\'t laugh. There must be some meaning in his
words. Let us ask him.\' Thereupon I said to Keshab: The tadpole, so
long as it has not dropped its tail, lives only in the water. It cannot
move about on dry land. But as soon as it drops its tail it hops out on
the bank; then it can live both on land and in water. Likewise, as long
as a man has not dropped his tail of ignorance, he can live only in the
water of the world. But when he drops his tail, that is to say, when he
attains the Knowledge of God, then he can roam about as a free soul, or
live as a householder if he likes.\' \"

Mahimacharan and. the other devotees remained spellbound, listening to
the Master\'s words.

**Master and Devendra Tagore**

MASTER: \"Once I visited Devendranath Tagore with Mathur Babu. I said to
Mathur: \'I have heard that Devendra Tagore thinks of God. I should like
to see him.\' \'All right,\' said Mathur, \'I will take you to him. We
were fellow students in the Hindu College and. I am very friendly with
him.\' We went to Devendra\'s house. Mathur and Devendra had not seen
each other for a long time. Devendra said to Mathur: \'You have changed
a little. You have grown fat around the stomach.\' Mathur said,
referring to me: \'He has come to see you. He is always mad about God.\'
I wanted to see Devendra\'s physical marks and said to him, \'Let me see
your body.\' He pulled up his shirt, and I found that he had very fair
skin tinted red. His hair had not yet turned grey.

\"At the outset I noticed a little vanity in Devendra. And isn\'t that
natural? He had such wealth, such scholarship, such name and fame!
Noticing that streak of vanity, I asked Mathur: \'Well, is vanity the
outcome of knowledge or ignorance? Can a knower of Brahman have such a
feeling as, \"I am a scholar; I am a Jnāni; I am rich\"?\'

\"While I was talking to Devendra, I suddenly got into that state of
mind in which I can see a man as he really is. I was convulsed with
laughter inside. In that state I regard scholars and the book-learned as
mere straw. If I see that a scholar has no discrimination and
renunciation, I regard him as worthless straw. I see that he is like a
vulture, which soars high but fixes its look on a charnel-pit down
below.

\"I found that Devendra had combined both yoga and bhoga in his life. He
had a number of children, all young. The family physician was there.
Thus, you see, though he was a Jnāni, yet he was preoccupied with
worldly life. I said to him: \'You are the King Janaka of this Kaliyuga.

> *Holding to one as well as the other,*
>
> *He drank his milk from a brimming cup!*

I have heard that you live in the world and think of God; so I have come
to see you. Please tell me something about God.\'

\"He recited some texts from the Vedas. He said, \'This universe is like
a chandelier and each living being is a light in it.\' Once, meditating
in the Panchavati, I too, had had a vision like that. I found his words
agreed with my vision, and I thought he must be very great man. I asked
him to explain his words. He said: \'God has created men to manifest His
own glory; otherwise, who could know this universe? Everything becomes
dark without the lights in the chandelier. One cannot even see the
chandelier itself.\'

\"We talked a long time. Devendra was pleased and said to me, \'You must
come to our Brahmo Samaj festival.\' \'That\', I said, \'depends on the
will of God. You can see the state of my mind. There\'s no knowing when
God will put me into a particular state.\' Devendra insisted: \'No, you
must come. \'But put on your cloth and wear a shawl over your body.
Someone might say something. unkind about your untidiness, and that
would hurt me.\' \'No,\' I replied, \'I cannot promise that. I cannot be
a babu.\' Devendra and Mathur laughed.

\"The very next day Mathur received a letter from Devendra forbidding me
to go to the festival. He wrote that it would be ungentlemanly of me not
to cover my body with a shawl. (All laugh.)

**Colonel Viswanath**

\"There is another big man: Captain. Though a man of the world, he is a
great lover of God. (To Mahima) Talk to him some time. He knows the
Vedas, the Vedānta , the Bhagavata, the Gitā, the Adhyātma Rāmāyana, and
other scriptures by heart. You will find that out when you talk to him.

\"He has great piety. Once I was going along a street in Baranagore and
he held an umbrella over my head. He invites me to his house and shows
me great attention. He fans me, massages my feet, and feeds me with
various dishes. Once at his house I went into samādhi in the toilet; and
he took care of me there though he is so particular about his orthodox
habits. He didn\'t show any abhorrence for the place.

\"He has many expenses. He supports his brothers who live in Benares.
His wife was a miserly woman at first.

Now she is so burdened by the expenses of the family that she cannot
spend all the money she would like to.

\"Captain\'s wife said to me: \'He doesn\'t enjoy worldly life. That is
why he once said he would renounce the world.\' True, every now and then
he expressed that desire.

\"Captain was born in a family of devotees. His father was a soldier. I
have heard that on the battle-field he would worship Śiva with one hand
and hold a naked sword in the other.

\"Captain is a strong upholder of orthodox conventions. Because of my
visiting Keshab Chandra Sen, he stopped coming here for a month. He said
to me that Keshab had violated the social conventions: he dined with the
English, had married his daughter into another caste, and had lost his
own caste. I said to Captain: \'What do I care for such things? Keshab
chants the name of God; so I go to him to hear about God. I eat only the
plum; what do I care about the thorns?\' But Captain remained stubborn.
He said to me, \'Why do you see Keshab?\' I answered him rather sharply:
\'But I don\'t go to him for money; I go there to hear the name of God;
And how is it that you visit the Viceroy\'s house? He is a mlechchha.
How can you be in his company?\' That silenced him a little.

\"But he is a great devotee. When he worships he performs *Ārati* with
camphor. When he recites hymns he

becomes a totally different person. He becomes absorbed.

**Essence of Vedānta**

(To Mahimacharan) \"In the light of Vedantic reasoning the world is
illusory, unreal as a dream. The Supreme Soul is the Witness-the witness
of the three states of waking, dream, and deep sleep. These things are
in your line of thought. The waking state is only as real as the dream.
Let me tell you a story that agrees with your attitude.

\"There was a farmer. who lived in the countryside. He was a real Jnāni.
He earned his living by farming. He was married, and after many years a
son was born to him, whom he named Haru. The parents loved the boy
dearly. This was natural, since he was the one precious gem in the
family. On account of his religious nature the farmer was loved by the
villagers. One day he was working in the field when a neighbour came and
told him that Haru had had an attack of cholera. The farmer at once
returned home and arranged for treatment for the boy. But Haru died. The
other members of the family were grief-stricken, but the farmer acted as
if nothing had happened. He consoled his family and told them that
grieving was futile. Then he went back to his field. On returning home
he found his wife weeping even more bitterly. She said to him: \"How
heartless you are! You haven\'t shed one tear for the child.\' The
farmer replied quietly: \'Shall I tell you why I haven\'t wept? I had a
very vivid dream last night. I dreamt I had become a king; I was the
father of eight sons and was very happy with them. Then I woke up. Now I
am greatly perplexed. Should I weep for those eight sons or for this one
Haru?\'

\'The farmer was a Jnāni; therefore he realized that the waking state is
as unreal as the dream state. There is only one eternal Substance, and
that is the Ātman.

\"But for my part I accept everything: Turiya and also the three states
of waking, dream; and deep sleep. I accept all three states. I accept
all- Brahman and also māyā, the universe, and its living beings. If I
accepted less I should not get the full weight.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"The full weight? How is that?\" (All laugh.)

**Qualified Advaita**

MASTER: \" Brahman is qualified by the universe and its living beings.
Atthe beginning, while following the method of \'Not this, not this\',
one has to eliminate the universe and its living beings. But as long as
\'I-consciousness\' remains, one cannot but feel that it is God Himself
who has become everything. He alone has become the twenty-four cosmic
principles.

\"When a man speaks of the essential part of the bel-fruit, he means its
flesh only, and not the seeds and shell. But if he wants to speak of the
total weight of the fruit, it will not do for him to weigh only the
flesh. He must accept the whole thing: seeds and shell and flesh. Seeds
and shell and flesh belong to one and the same fruit.

**Synthesis of Sankara and Ramanuja**

\"The Nitya and the Lila belong to the same Reality. Therefore I accept
everything, the Relative as well as the Absolute. I don\'t explain away
the world as māyā. Were I to do that I should get short weight.\"

MAHIMACHARAN: \"It is a good synthesis: from the Absolute to the
Relative, and from the Relative to the Absolute.\"

MASTER: \'The jnanis regard everything as illusory, like a dream; but
the bhaktas accept all the states. The milk flows only in dribblets from
the Jnāni. (All laugh.) There are some cows that pick and choose their
fodder; hence their milk flows only in dribblets. But cows that don\'t
discriminate so much, and eat whatever they get, give milk in torrents.
A superior devotee of God accepts both the Absolute and the Relative;
therefore he is able to enjoy the Divine even when his mind comes down
from the Absolute. Such a devotee is like the cows that give milk in
torrents.\" (All laugh.)

MAHIMA: \"But the milk of a cow that eats without discrimination smells
a little.\" (Laughter.)

MASTER (with a smile): \"That\'s true, no doubt: Therefore that milk
should be boiled. One should boil such milk over the fire a little
while; there will be no smell whatever if you boil the milk over the
fire of Knowledge. (All laugh.)

**Explanation of \"Aum\"**

(To Mahima) \"You explain \'Aum\' with reference to \'a\', \'u\', and
\'m\' only.\"

AHIMA: \"\'A\', \'u\', and \'m\' mean creation, preservation, and
destruction.\"

MASTER: \"But I give the illustration of the sound of a gong: \'tom\',
t-o-m. It is the merging of the Lila in the

Nitya: the gross, the subtle, and the causal merge in the Great Cause;
waking, dream, and deep sleep merge in Turiya. The striking of the gong
is like the falling of a heavy weight into a big ocean. Waves begin to
rise: the Relative rises from the Absolute; the causal, subtle, and
gross bodies appear out of the Great Cause; from Turiya emerge the
states of deep sleep, dream, and waking. These waves arising from the
Great Ocean merge again in the Great Ocean. From the Absolute to the
Relative, and from the Relative to the Absolute. Therefore I give the
illustration of the gong\'s sound, \'tom\'. I have clearly perceived all
these things. It has been revealed to me that there exists an Ocean of
Consciousness without limit. From It come all things of the relative
plane, and in It they merge again. Millions of Brahmandas rise in that
Chidakasa and merge in It again. All this has been revealed to me; I
don\'t know, much about what your books say.\"

MAHlMA: \"Those to whom such things were revealed did not write the
scriptures. They were rapt in their own experiences; when would they
write? One needs a somewhat calculating mind to write. Others learnt
these things from the seers and wrote the books.\"

MASTER: \"Worldly people ask why one does not get rid of attachment to
\'woman and gold\'. That attachment disappears after the realization of
God. If a man once tastes the Bliss of Brahman, then his mind no longer
runs after the enjoyment of sense pleasures or wealth or name and fame.
If the moth once sees the light, it no longer goes into the darkness.

\"Some friends said to Ravana: You have been assuming different forms
for Sita . Why don\'t you go to her in

the form of Rāma?\' Ravana replied: \'When I contemplate Rāma, even the
position of Brahma appears insignificant to me, not to speak of the
company of another man\'s wife! How could I take the form of Rāma for
such a purpose?\'

\"All worship and spiritual discipline are directed to one end alone,
namely, to get rid of worldly attachment. The more you meditate on God,
the less you will be attached to the trifling things of the world. The
more you love the Lotus Feet of God, the less you will crave the things
of the world or pay heed to creature comforts. You will look on another
man\'s wife as your mother and regard your own wife as your companion in
spiritual life. You will get rid of your bestial desires and acquire
godly qualities. You will be totally unattached to the world. Though you
may still have to live in the world, you will live as a jivamnukta. The
disciples of Sri Chaitanya lived as householders in a spirit of
detachment. \"You may quote thousands of arguments from Vedānta
philosophy to a true lover of God, and try to explain the world as a
dream, but you cannot shake his devotion to God. In spite of all your
efforts he will come back to his devotion.

\"A man born with an element of Śiva becomes a Jnāni; his mind is always
inclined to the feeling that the world is unreal and Brahman alone is
real. But when a man is born with an element of Vishnu he. develops
ecstatic love of God. That love can never be destroyed. It may wane a
little now and then, when he indulges in philosophical reasoning, but it
ultimately returns to him increased a thousandfold.\"

After the devotees had left the Master, Mahimacharan brought Hazra to
the room. M. was present. Mahima said to Sri Ramakrishna: \"Sir, I have
a complaint against you. Why have you asked Hazra to go home? He has

no desire to return to his family.\"

**Duty to one\'s mother**

MASTER: \"His mother has told Ramlal how much she is suffering on
account of his being away from home; so I have asked Hazra to go home,
at least for three days, and see her. Can anyone succeed in spiritual
discipline if it causes suffering for, his mother? While visiting
Vrindāvan, I had almost made up my mind to live there. But, when I
remembered my mother, I said to myself, \'My mother will weep if I stay
away from her.\' So I returned here with Mathur Babu. Besides, why
should a Jnāni like Hazra be afraid of going back to the world?\"

MAHIMA, (with a smile): \"Sir, that would be a pertinent question if
Hazra were a Jnāni.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Oh, Hazra has attained everything. He has just a
little attachment to the world because of his children and a small debt.
As people say, my aunt is now in perfect health, only she is slightly
ill!\"

MAHIMA: \"Where, sir, is Hazra\'s knowledge?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Oh, you don\'t know! Everybody says Hazra is quite a
man.

Everybody knows that he lives in the Dakshineswar temple garden. People
talk of nothing but Hazra. Who would bother to mention my name?\" (All
laugh.)

AZRA: \"You, sir, are incomparable. You have no peer in the
world.Therefore nobody understands you.\"

MASTER: \"There you are! To be sure, no one can have dealings with the
incomparable. So why should people mention me at all?\"

MAHIMA: \"What does he know, sir? He will do your bidding.\"

MASTER: \"That is not so. You had better ask him about it. He said to
me, \'You and I are on even terms.\'\"

MAHIMA: \"He argues a great deal.\"

MASTER: \"Now and then he teaches me a lesson. (All laugh.) Sometimes I
scold him when he argues too much. Later, when I am lying in bed inside
the mosquito curtain, I feel unhappy at the idea of having offended him.
So I leave the bed, go to Hazra, and salute him. Then I feel peace of
mind.

(To Hazra) \"Why do you address the Pure Ātman as \'Isvara\'? The Pure
Ātman is inactive and is the Witness of the three states. When I think
of the acts of creation, preservation, and destruction, then I call the
Pure Ātman \'Isvara\'. What is the Pure Ātman like? It is like a magnet
lying at a great distance from a needle. The needle moves, but the
magnet lies motionless, inactive.\"

Toward evening Sri Ramakrishna was pacing the room. M. was sitting
alone, thinking. Suddenly the Master said to him tenderly: \"Please give
me a couple of linen shirts. As you know, I cannot use everybody\'s
things. I thought of asking Captain for the shirts, but you had better
give them to me.\" M. felt highly gratified and said, \"As you please,
sir.\"

At dusk incense was burnt in Sri Ramakrishna\'s room, and, as usual, he
bowed before the pictures of gods and goddesses on the walls and chanted
their names softly. From outside one could hear the murmuring of the
Ganges and the music of the evening worship in the temples of Kāli,
Vishnu, and Śiva. Through the door one could see the priest at a
distance moving from one temple to another, a bell in his left hand and
a light in his right, an attendant carrying the gong. The evening melody
was in harmony with the spirit of the hour and place and with the
innermost thoughts of the worshippers. For the time being the sordid
things of daily life were forgotten.

Later Sri Ramakrishna was seated in his room in his usual blissful mood.
Ishan had come from Calcutta. He

had burning faith in God. He used to say, \"If a man leaves the house
with the hallowed name of Durga on his lips, then Śiva Himself protects
him with His celestial weapons.\"

MASTER (to Ishan): \"You have great faith. But I haven\'t so much. (All
laugh.) God can be realized only through faith.\"

ISHAN; \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"You practise religious rites-japa, fasting, and the like. That
is very good. If a man feels sincerely drawn to God, then God makes him
practise all these disciplines. The devotee will certainly realize God
if he practises them without desiring their results. A devotee observes
many rites because of the injunctions of the scriptures. Such devotion
is called vaidhibhakti. But there is a higher form of devotion known as
raga-bhakti, which springs from yearning and love for God. Prahlada had
such devotion. When the devotee develops that love, he no longer needs
to perform prescribed rites.

**November 9, 1884**

Sri Ramakrishna was in his room, seated on the small couch and facing
the east. The devotees were sitting on the floor. It was about midday
when M. arrived and took a seat after saluting the Master. Gradually
other devotees began to gather. Vijaykrishna Goswami was there with
several Brahmo devotees. The priest Ram Chakravarty was present also.
Mahimacharan, Narayan, and Kishori arrived a few minutes later.

It was the beginning of winter. Sri Ramakrishna had felt the need of
some shirts and had asked M. to bring them. Besides two broad cloth
shirts, M. had brought another of a heavy material, for which Sri
Ramakrishna had not asked.

MASTER (to M.): \"You had better take that one back with you. You can
use it yourself. There is nothing wrong in that. Tell me, what kind of
shirt did I ask you to bring?\"

M: \"Sir, you told me to get you plain ones. You didn\'t ask me to buy
the heavier one.\"

MASTER: \"Then please take that one back. (To Vijay and the others) You
see, Dwarika Babu gave me a shawl. The Mārwāri devotees also brought one
for me. I couldn\'t accept.\"

Vijay interrupted the Master, saying: \"That is right, sir. If a man
needs a thing, he must accept it. And there must be a man to give it.
Who but a man will give?\"

**God supplies the needs of devotees**

MASTER: \'The giver is the Lord Himself. The mother-in-law said to her
daughter-in-law: \'My child, I see that everybody has someone to render
him a little personal service. It would be so nice if you could find
someone to massage your feet.\' The daughter-in-law said: \'Mother, God
Himself will massage my feet. I don\'t need anyone else.\' She spoke
thus because she was a sincere lover of God.

\"Once a fakir went to the Emperor Akbar to ask for money. The Emperor
was saying his prayers. He prayed, \'O Lord, give me money; give me
wealth.\' The fakir started to leave the palace, but the Emperor
motioned to him to wait. After finishing his prayers, Akbar came to the
holy man and said, \'Why were you going away?\' The fakir replied, \'You
yourself were begging for money and wealth; so I thought that if I must
beg, I would beg of God and not of a beggar.\'\"

VIJAY: \"I saw a sādhu at Gaya. He did not take the initiative in
anything. One day he wanted to feed some devotees. Suddenly we found
that butter, flour, fruits, and other food-stuff had arrived from no one
knew where.\"

**Three classes of sādhus**

MASTER (to Vijay and the others): \'There are three classes of sādhus:
good, mediocre, and bad. The good

sādhu makes no effort to get his food. The dandis, among others, belong
to the mediocre and bad classes. To get food the mediocre sādhu will
knock at the door of a house and say, \'Namo Narayana\'. The bad sādhu
starts a quarrel if he doesn\'t get his alms.

\"The good sādhu behaves like a python. He sits in one place and the
food comes to him. The python doesn\'t move from where it is. A young
sādhu, who had been a am Brahmachari from his boyhood, went out to beg.
A young girl offered him alms. The sādhu saw her breasts and thought she
had abscesses. He asked about them. The elderly women of the family
explained that she would some day be a mother and that God had given her
breasts to give milk to her children; God had provided for all this
beforehand. At these words the sādhu was struck with wonder. He said:
Then 1 don\'t need to beg. God must have provided for me too.\"

Some of the devotees thought that in that case they should not take any
initiative either.

MASTER: \"But those who think that an effort is needed must make the
effort.\"

VIJAY: \'There is a nice story about that in the Bhaktamala.\"

MASTER: \"Tell it to us.\"

VIJAY: \"Please tell us yourself.\"

MASTER: \"No, you tell it. 1 don\'t remember it very well. \"One should
hear these things at the beginning. That is why I listened to them years
ago. But now I am no longer in that mood. Hanuman said: \'I don\'t know
the position of the stars or the phase of the moon. I only think of
Rāma.\'

\'The chatak bird craves only rain-water. Even when it is dying of
thirst, it turns its beak upward and wants only water from the sky. The
Ganges, the Jamuna, and the seven oceans are filled to the brim, but
still it will not touch the water of the earth.

\'Rāma and Lakshmana visited Pampa Lake. Lakshmana saw a crow very eager
for water. Again and again it went to the edge of the water but would
not drink. Lakshmana asked Rāma about it. Rāma said: \'Brother, this
crow is a great devotee of God. Day and night it repeats the name of
Rāma. Its throat is parched with thirst, but still it won\'t drink for
fear of missing a repetition of Rāma\'s name.\'

\"On a full-moon night I said to Haladhāri, \'Brother, is it the night
of the new moon?\' (All laugh.)

(Smiling) \"Yes, it is true. Once I was told that a characteristic of a
man of Perfect Knowledge is that he cannot distinguish between the full
moon and the new moon. But how could one convince Haladhāri of that? He
said: This is certainly the dark Kaliyuga. He cannot distinguish the
full moon from the new moon! And people respect him!\"

Mahimacharan entered the room.

MASTER (respectfully): \"Come in. Come in, sir. Please take a seat.

(To Vijay and the other devotees) \"In the ecstatic state of mind I
cannot remember a date. The other day there was a religious festival at
Beni Pāl\'s garden. I forgot the date. I can no longer remember the last
day of the month, when it is very auspicious to repeat the name ofGod.\"

Sri Ramakrishna remained thoughtful a few minutes.

MASTER: \"But I remember if a man makes an engagement to visit me.

\"A man attains this state when his mind is one hundred per cent
absorbed in God. When Hanuman returned from Ceylon, Rāma said to him:
\'You have seen Sita . Tell me, how did you find her?\' Hanuman said:
\'O

Rāma, I saw that only the body of Sita lay there; it held neither her
mind nor her soul. She has indeed consecrated her mind and soul to Your
Lotus Feet. Therefore I saw only her body in Ceylon. Further, I saw the
King of Death prowling about. But what could he do? It was only a body;
it had neither mind nor soul.\'

\"If you meditate on an ideal you will acquire its nature. If you think
of God day and night, you will acquire the nature of God. A salt doll
went into the ocean to measure its depth. It became one with the ocean.
What is the goal of books or scriptures? The attainment of God. A man
opened a book belonging to a sādhu. He saw the word \'Rāma\' written on
every page. There was nothing else.

\"If a man loves God, even the slightest thing kindles spiritual feeling
in him. Then, repeating the name of Rāma but once, he gets the fruit of
ten million sandhyas. At the sight of a cloud the peacock\'s emotion is
awakened: he dances, spreading his. tail. Radha had the same experience.
Just the sight of a cloud recalled Krishna to her mind.

\"Chaitanyadeva was passing a village. He heard that drums were made
from the earth of that place. At once he was overwhelmed with ecstasy
because drums are used in kirtan.

\"But who can have this spiritual awakening? Only he who has renounced
his attachment to worldly things. If the sap of attachment is totally
dried up in a man, the slightest suggestion kindles his spiritual
emotion. Though you strike a wet match a thousand times, it will not
produce a spark. But if it is dried, the slightest rubbing will set it
aflame.

\"Pain and pleasure are inevitable in a body. He who has realized God
dedicates his mind and life, his body and soul, to God. When Rāma and
Lakshmana went to take their bath in Pampa Lake, they thrust their bows
into the ground. Coming out of the water, Lakshmana took out his bow and
found its tip stained with blood. Rāma said to him: \'Look, brother!
Look. Perhaps we have hurt some creature.\" Lakshmana dug in the earth
and found a big bullfrog. It was dying. Rāma said to the frog in a
sorrowful voice: \'Why didn\'t you croak? We should have tried to save
you. You croak lustily enough when you are in the jaws of a snake.\' The
frog said: \'O Lord, when I am attacked by a snake I croak, saying: \"O
Rāma, save me! O Rāma, save me!\" This time I found that it was Rāma who
was killing me; so I kept still.\'\"

Sri Ramakrishna remained silent a few moments watching the devotees. He
had heard that Mahimacharan did not believe in following a guru. He
began the conversation again.

**Faith in guru**

MASTER: \"A man should have faith in the words of his guru. He doesn\'t
have to look into his guru\'s character. \'Though my guru visits the
grog-shop, still he is the Embodiment of Eternal Bliss.\'

\"A man who used to give recitals of the Chandi and the Bhagavata once
said, \'A broomstick is itself unclean, but it cleans dirty places.\' \"

Mahimacharan studied the Vedānta. His aim was to attain Brahmajnana. He
followed the path of knowledge and was always reasoning.

MASTER (to Mahima): \"The aim of the Jnāni is to know the nature of his
own Self. This is Knowledge; this is

liberation. The true nature of the Self is that It is the Supreme
Brahman: I and the Supreme Brahman are one. But this Knowledge is hidden
on account of māyā.

\"I said to Harish; \'This is the whole thing: the gold is hidden under
a few basketfuls of earth, and you must remove the earth.\'

**\"I-consciousness\"**

\"The bhaktas retain \'I-consciousness\'; the jnanis do not. Nangta used
to teach how to establish oneself in the true Self, saying, \'Merge the
mind in the buddhi and the buddhi in the Ātman; then you will be
established in

your true Self.\"

\"But the \'I\' persists. It cannot be got rid of. Imagine a limitless
expanse of water: above and below, before and behind, right and left,
everywhere there is water. In that water is placed a jar filled with
water. There is water inside the jar and water outside, but the jar is
still there. The \'I\' is the jar.

\"Even after attaining Knowledge, the Jnāni keeps his body as before.
But the fire of Knowledge burns away his lust and other passions. Many
days ago, during an electric storm, a thunderbolt struck the Kāli
temple. We saw that no injury had been done to the doors; only the
points of the screws were broken. The doors are the body, and the
passions-lust and so forth-are the screws.

\"A Jnāni loves to talk only about God. He feels pained if one talks
about worldly things. But a worldly man belongs to a different class. He
always has the turban of ignorance on his head. He always comes back to
worldly topics.

\"The Vedas speak of the \'seven planes\' of mind. When the Jnāni\'s
mind ascends to the fifth plane, he cannot listen to anything or talk of
anything but God. At that stage only words of wisdom come from his lips.

\"The Vedas speak of Satchidananda Brahman. Brahman is neither one nor
two; It is between one and two. It cannot be described either as
existence or as non-existence; It is between existence and
non-existence.

**Sincere and formal devotion**

\"When the devotee develops raga-bhakti, passionate love of God, he
realizes Him. But one loses vaidhi-bhakti, formal devotion, as easily as
one gains it. This is formal devotion: so much japa, so much meditation,
so much sacrifice and homa, so many articles of worship, and the
recitation of so many mantras, before the Deity. Such devotion comes in
a moment and goes in a moment. Many people say: \'Well, friend, we have
lived on havishya for so many days! How many times we have worshipped
the Deity at our home! And what have we achieved?\' But there is no
falling away from raga-bhakti. And who gets this passionate love for
God? Those who have performed many meritorious deeds in their past
births, or those who are eternally perfect. Think of a dilapidated
house, for instance: while clearing away the undergrowth and rubbish one
suddenly discovers a fountain fitted with a pipe. It has been covered
with earth and bricks, but as soon as they are removed the water shoots
up.

**Sign of a true devotee**

\"Those who have passionate love for God do not say any such thing as:
\'O brother, how strict I have been about food! But what have I
achieved?\' New farmers give up cultivating if their fields do not yield
any crops. But hereditary farmers will continue to cultivate their
fields whether they get a crop or not. Their fathers and grandfathers
were farmers; they know that they too must accept farming as their means
of livelihood.

\"Only those who have developed raga-bhakti for God may be called His
sincere devotees. God becomes responsible for them. If you enter your
name in a hospital register, the doctor will not discharge you until you
are cured. Those who are held by God have nothing to fear. The son who
holds to his father, while walking along the narrow ridge of a
paddy-field, may slip if he absent-mindedly lets go his father\'s hand;
but if the father holds the son by the hand, there is no such danger.

\"Is there anything that is impossible for faith? And a true devotee has
faith in everything: the formless Reality, God with form, Rāma, Krishna
and the Divine Mother.

\"Once, while going to Kamarpukur, I was overtaken by a storm. I was in
the middle of a big meadow. The place was haunted by robbers. I began to
repeat the names of all the deities: Rāma, Krishna, and Bhagavati. I
also repeated the name of Hanuman. I chanted the names of them all. What
does that mean? Let me tell you. While the servant is counting out the
money to purchase supplies, he says, \'These pennies are for potatoes
these for egg-plants, these for fish.\' He counts the money separately,
but after the list is completed, he puts the coins together.

\"When one develops love of God, one likes to talk only of God. If you
love a person, you love to talk and hear about him. A worldly persn\'s
mouth waters while he talks about his son. If someone praises his son,
he will at once say to the boy, \'Go and get some water for your uncle
to wash his feet.

\"Those who love pigeons are highly pleased if you praise pigeons before
them. But if you speak ill of pigeons, they will at once exclaim, \'Has
anyone in your line for fourteen generations ever raised pigeons?\'\"

**Advantage of a householder\'s life**

Sri Ramakrishna now addressed Mahimacharan, who was a householder.

MASTER: \"What need is there attachment. But you must have

of renouncing the world altogether? It is enough if you can rid yourself
of *sādhanā* you have to fight the sense-organs.

\"It is a great advantage to fight from inside a fort. You get much help
from the fort. The world is the place for enjoyment. After enjoying
different things, you should give them up one by one. Once I had a
desire to put a gold chain around my waist. I obtained one at last and
put it on, but I had to take it off immediately.

\"Once I ate some onion. While eating it I discriminated, \'O mind, this
is onion.\' Then I moved it to different places in my mouth and at last
spat it out.\"

A musician was expected. He was to sing with his party. Sri Ramakrishna
asked the devotees every now and then, \"Where is the musician?\"

MAHIMA: \"We are quite all right as we are.\"

MASTER: \"No, sir. You get this all through the year.\"

A devotee outside the room said, \"The musician has come.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was filled with joy and said, \"Ah! Has he?\"

Mats were spread on the floor of the long verandah northeast of the
Master\'s room. Sri Ramakrishna said:

\"Sprinkle a little Ganges water on the mats. Many worldly people have
sat on them.\"

The ladies of Pyari Babu\'s family, from Bali, had come to visit the
temples. They wanted to listen to the kirtan. A devotee said to Sri
Ramakrishna: \"These ladies have been inquiring whether there would be
any place in the room for them. Can they have seats?\" The kirtan had
already begun. The Master said, \"No, no! Where is any room here?\"

**Master and Narayan**

Narayan arrived and saluted Sri Ramakrishna. The latter said tenderly:
\"Why have you come? Your people at home have beaten you so much!\" He
signed to Baburam to give Narayan something to eat. Narayan entered the
Master\'s room. Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna followed him. He wanted to feed
Narayan with his own hands. Afterwards he returned to the verandah.

Many devotees were present, including Vijay, Mahimacharan, Narayan, M.,
and the younger Gopal. Soon Narayan came back to the verandah and took
his seat by the Master.

About three o\'clock Adhar arrived. At the sight of him Sri Ramakrishna
appeared excited. The devotee saluted the Master and sat on the floor.
Sri Ramakrishna beckoned to him to come nearer.

When the music was over the gathering of devotees broke up. Some began
to stroll in the garden and some went to the temples to watch the
evening service.

In the evening arrangements were made for kirtan inside the Master\'s
room. Sri Ramakrishna eagerly asked a devotee to have an extra lamp. The
two lamps lit the room brightly.

Sri Ramakrishna said to Vijay: \"Why are you sitting there? Come nearer
to me.\" This time the kirtan created an intense atmosphere. The Master
danced in an ecstasy of joy; the devotees also danced encircling him.
While Vijay was dancing his cloth dropped. He was unconscious.

When the music was over, Vijay began to look for his key, which had
fallen somewhere. The Master said to him with a laugh, \"Why bother
about it any more?\"

He meant that Vijay should have nothing more to do with boxes and keys.

Kishori saluted Sri Ramakrishna and was about to take his leave. The
Master blessed him, touching his chest tenderly, and bade him good-bye.
His words were full of love. M. and Gopal saluted the Master. They too
were about to take their leave. He said to them with the same affection:
\"Couldn\'t you go tomorrow morning? You may catch cold at night.\"

M. and Gopal decided to spend the night with Sri Ramakrishna. They sat
on the floor with a few other devotees.

Sri Ramakrishna had had no rest the whole day: the devotees had been
with him all the time. He went out for a few minutes. Returning to the
room he saw M. taking down a song from Ramlal.

MASTER: \"What are you doing?\"

M. said that he was writing down a song. On being told what the song
was, the Master remarked that it was a rather long song. M. wrote a line
or two and then stopped writing.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna took his supper of farina pudding and one
or two luchis. A lighted lamp stood on a stand by his side. M. sat near
him. The Master asked if there were any sweets in the room. M. had
brought some sandesh which he had put on the shelf. Sri Ramakrishna
asked M. to give him a sweet. M. searched for the sweets but could not
find them. He was embarrassed. They had been given to the devotees.

After finishing his supper, Sri Ramakrishna sat on the small couch and
M. seated himself on the foot-rug. The Master, talking about Narayan,
was overcome with emotion.

MASTER: \"I saw Naran today.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. His eyes were moist. When I looked at his face I felt
like weeping.\"

MASTER: \'The sight of him arouses a mother\'s love in me, as it were.
His relatives beat him at home because he comes here. There is none to
defend him.\"M : \'The other day he left his books at Haripada\'s house
and fled to you.

MASTER: \"It was not good for him to do that.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was silent. After a few minutes he continued.

MASTER: \"You see, he has much substance in him. Otherwise, how could I
be attracted to him even though I was listening to the kirtan at the
time? I had to leave the music and go into the room. That never happened
before.\"

Again Sri Ramakrishna fell silent. A few minutes later he began to talk.

MASTER: \"In an ecstatic state I asked him how he was feeling. He just
said he was happy. (To M.) Feed him

now and then-as parents do their child.\"

Sri Ramakrishna then spoke about Tejchandra.

MASTER (to M.): \"Please ask him what he thinks of me. Does he thinkof
me as a Jnāni? Or what does he say about me? I understand that he is
very reticent. (To Gopal) Ask Tejchandra to come here Saturdays and
Tuesdays. (To M.) Suppose I go to your school and look for-\"

M. thought that Sri Ramakrishna wanted to go to his school to see
Narayan. He said to the Master, \"You might as well wait at our house.\"

MASTER: \"No, I have something else in mind. I should like to see
whetherthere are other worth-while boys in the school.\"

M: \"Of course you can go. Other visitors come to the school. You
cancome too.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was smoking. M. and Gopal finished their supper. They
decided to sleep in the nahabat. M.

again sat on the floor near Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER (to M.): \'There may be some pots and pans in the nahabat.Why not
sleep here in this room?\"

M: \"Very well, sir.\"

It was ten or eleven o\'clock at night. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on
the small couch, resting against a pillow. M. sat on the floor. The
Master was conversing with him. A lamp burnt on a stand near the wall.
The Master felt great compassion for his devotees. He wanted to bless M.
by accepting his personal service.

MASTER: \"My feet ache. Please rub them gently.\"

M. seated himself on the small couch and took the Master\'s feet on his
lap. He stroked them. Now and then Sri Ramakrishna would ask his
disciple a question.

MASTER (smiling): \"How did you like today\'s conversation?\"

M: \"Very much indeed.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"How I spoke about the Emperor Akbar!\"

1.  \"It was very good.\" MASTER: \"Repeat it to me.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"A fakir came to visit Akbar. The Emperor was saying his prayers.
    In his prayers he was asking God to give him wealth and riches.
    Thereupon the fakir was about to leave the. room quietly. Later,
    when the Emperor asked him about it, the fakir said, \'If I must
    beg, why should I beg of a beggar?\'\"

MASTER: \"What else did we talk about?\"

1.  \"You told us a great deal about saving up for the future.\" MASTER
    (smiling): \"What did I say?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"As long as a man feels that he must try, he should make an effort.
    How well you told us about it at Sinthi!\"

MASTER: \"What did I say?\"

1.  \"God takes upon Himself complete responsibility for one who totally
    > depends upon Him. It is like a guardian taking charge of a minor.
    > You also told us that at a feast a child cannot by himself find a
    > place to eat his meal; someone finds a place for him.\"

> MASTER: \"No, that is not quite to the point. I said that the child
> doesn\'t fall if the father leads him and holds his hand.\"

1.  \"You also described the three classes of sādhus. The best sādhu
    > does not move about to get his food; he lives in one place and
    > gets his food there, You told us about that young sādhu who said,
    > when he saw the breasts of a young girl, \'Why has she those
    > abscesses?\' You told us many other things.\"

> MASTER (smiling): \"What else?\"

1.  \"About the crow of Pampa Lake. He repeated the name of Rāma day and
    > night. That is why he couldn\'t drink the water though he went to
    > its edge. And about the holy man in whose book was written only
    > \'Om Rāma\'. And what Hanuman said to Rāma.\"

> MASTER: \"What did he say?\"

1.  \"Hanuman said to Rāma: \'I saw Sita in Ceylon; but it was only her
    > body. Her mind and soul were lying at Your feet.\'

> \"And about the chatak bird. He will not drink anything but
> rain-water. And about jnanayoga and bhaktiyoga.\"
>
> MASTER: \"What did I say about them?\"

1.  \"As long as one is conscious of the \'jar\', the ego will certainly
    > remain. As long as one is conscious of \'I\', one cannot get rid
    > of the idea, \'I am the devotee and Thou art God\'.\"

> MASTER: \"No, it is not that; the \'jar\' doesn\'t disappear whether
> one is conscious of it or not. One cannot get rid of the \'I\'. You
> may reason a thousand times; still it will not go.\"
>
> M. remained silent a few moments.

1.  \"You had that talk with Ishan Mukherji in the Kāli temple. We were
    > very lucky to be there.\" MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, yes. Tell me,
    > what did I say?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  \"You said that work is only the first step. You told us that you
    said to Sambhu Mallick, \'If God appears before you, will you ask
    Him for a number of hospitals and dispensaries?\'

> \"You said another thing: God does not reveal Himself to a person as
> long as he is attached to work. You said that to Keshab Sen.\"
>
> MASTER: \"What did I say?\"

1.  \"As long as the baby plays with the toy and forgets everything
    else, its mother looks after her cooking and other household duties;
    but when the baby throws away the toy and cries, then the mother
    puts down the rice-pot and comes to the baby.

> \"You said another thing that day: Lakshmana asked Rāma where one
> could find God; after a great deal of explanation, Rāma said to him,
> \'Brother, I dwell in the man in whom you find ecstatic love-a love
> which makes him laugh and weep and dance and sing.\' \"
>
> MASTER: \"Ah me! Ah me!\"
>
> Sri Ramakrishna sat in silence a few minutes.

1.  \"That day you spoke only words of renunciation to Ishan. Since then
    many of us have come to our senses. Now we are eager to reduce our
    duties. You said that day, \'Ravana died in Ceylon and Behula wept
    bitterly for him.\'\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughed aloud.

M. (humbly): \"Sir, isn\'t it desirable to reduce the number of one\'s
duties and entanglements?\"

MASTER: \"Yes. But it is a different thing if you happen to come across
a sādhu or a poor man. Then you should serve him.\"

1.  \"And. that day you spoke very rightly to Ishan about flatterers.
    They are like vultures on a carcass. You once said that to
    Padmalochan also.\"

MASTER: \"No, to Vamandas of Ulo.\"

After a while M. sat on the floor near the small couch. Sri Ramakrishna
felt sleepy; he said to M.: \"Go to sleep. Where is Gopal? Please shut
the door.\"

Next morning Sri Ramakrishna left his bed very early. As usual, he
chanted the holy names of the different gods and goddesses. Now and then
he looked at the sacred river. The morning worship began in the temples
of Radhakanta and Mother Kāli. M. had spent the night on the floor of
the Master\'s room. He left his bed and watched the worship in. the
different temples.

Sri Ramakrishna finished his bath and went with M. to the Kāli temple.
He asked the disciple to lock the door of his room.

In the temple he took the seat in front of the image of Kāli and offered
flowers, sometimes at Her feet and sometimes on his own head. He fanned
the Deity. Then he returned to his room and asked M. to unlock the door.
Entering the room, he sat on the small couch. He was completely
overwhelmed with divine fervour and began to chant the name of God. M.
sat alone on the floor. Sri Ramakrishna began to sing about the Divine
Mother:

> *Who is there that can understand what Mother Kāli is?*
>
> *Even the six darsanas are powerless to reveal Her.*
>
> *It is She, the scriptures say, that is the Inner Self*
>
> *Of the yogi, who in Self discovers all his joy;*
>
> *She that, of Her own sweet will, inhabits every living thing. .*

Then he sang:

> *All creation is the sport of my mad Mother Kāli;*
>
> *By Her māyā the three worlds are bewitched. . . .*

He continued:

> *O Kāli, who can know Thee? Numberless are Thy forms. . .*

Again he sang:

> *O Mother, redeem me speedily!*
>
> *From terror of the King of Death I am about to die.*
>
> *M. said to himself, \"I wish he would sing:*
>
> *Mother, Thou canst not trick me any more,*
>
> *For I have seen Thy crimson Lotus Feet.\"*

Strangely enough, no sooner had the thought passed through M.\'s mind
than Sri Ramakrishna sang the song. A few minutes later he said to M.,
\"What do you think of the present state of my mind?\"

M. (smiling): \"It is your simple and natural state.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sang to himself the following refrain of a song:

*Unless a man is simple, he cannot recognize God, the Simple One.*

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 34**

BANKIM CHANDRA

> Saturday, December 6, 1884

**Adhar**

ADHAR, A GREAT DEVOTEE of Sri Ramakrishna, lived in Sobha bazar in the
northern section of Calcutta. Almost every day, after finishing his hard
work at the office and returning home in the late afternoon, he paid Sri
Ramakrishna a visit. From his home in Calcutta he would go to
Dakshineswar in a hired carriage. His sole delight was to visit the
Master. But he would hear very little of what Sri Ramakrishna said; for,
after saluting the Master and visiting the temples, he would lie down,
at the Master\'s request, on a mat spread on the floor and would soon
fall asleep. At nine or ten O\'clock he would be awakened to return
home. However, he considered himself blessed to be able to visit the
God-man of Dakshineswar. At Adhar\'s request Sri Ramakrishna often
visited his home. His visits were occasions for religious festivals.
Devotees in large numbers would assemble, and Adhar would feed them
sumptuously. One day, while Sri Ramakrishna was visiting his home, Adhar
said to him: \"Sir, you haven\'t come to our house for a long time. The
rooms seemed gloomy; they had a musty smell. But today the whole house
is cheerful; the sweetness of your presence fills the atmosphere. Today
I called on God earnestly. I even shed tears while praying. \"Is that
so?\" the Master said tenderly, casting a kindly glance on his disciple.

Sri Ramakrishna arrived at Adhar\'s house with his attendants. Everyone
was in a joyous mood. Adhar had arranged a rich feast. Many strangers
were present. At Adhar\'s invitation, several other deputy magistrates
had come; they wanted to watch the Master and judge his holiness. Among
them was Bankim Chandra Chatterji, perhaps the greatest literary figure
of Bengal during the later part of the nineteenth century. He was one of
the creators of modern Bengali literature and wrote on social and
religious subjects. Bankim was a product of the contact of India with
England. He gave modern interpretations of the Hindu scriptures and
advocated drastic social reforms.

Sri Ramakrishna had been talking happily with the devotees when Adhar
introduced several of his personal friends to him.

ADHAR (introducing Bankim): \"Sir, he is a great scholar and has written
many books. He has come here to see you. His name is Bankim Babu.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Bankim! Well, what has made you bent?\"

BANKIM (smiling): \"Why, sir, boots are responsible for it. The kicks of
our white masters have bent my body.\"

**Meaning of Radha and Krishna**

MASTER: \"No, my dear sir! Sri Krishna was bent on account of His
ecstatic love. His body was bent in three places owing to His love for
Radha. That is how some people explain Sri Krishna\'s form. Do you know
why He has a deep-blue complexion? And why He is of such small
stature-only three and a half cubits measured by His own hand? God looks
so as long as He is seen from a distance. So the water of the ocean
looks blue from afar. But if you go near the ocean and take the water in
your hand, you will no longer find it blue; it will be very clear,
transparent. So the sun appears small because it is very far away; if
you go near it, you will no longer find it small. When one knows the
true nature of God, He appears neither blue nor small. But that is a
far-off vision;one does not see it except in samādhi. As long as \'I\'
and \'you\' exist, name and form will also exist. Everything is God\'s
lila. His sportive pleasure. As long as a man is conscious of \'I\' and
\'you\', he will experience the manifestations of God through diverse
forms.

**Purusha and Prakriti imply and, Their inner harmony**

\"Sri Krishna is the Purusha; Srimati is His Śakti, the Primal Power.
The two are Purusha and Prakriti. What is the meaning of the Yugala
Murti, the conjoined images of Radha and Krishna? It is that Purusha and
Prakriti

are not different; there is no difference between them. Purusha cannot
exist without Prakriti, and Prakriti cannot exist without Purusha. If
you mention the one, the other is understood. It is like fire and its
power to burn; one cannot think of fire without its power to burn;
again, one cannot think of fire\'s power to burn without fire. Therefore
in the conjoined images of Radha and Krishna, Krishna\'s eyes are fixed
on Radha and Radha\'s on Krishna. Radha\'s complexion is golden, like
lightning; so Krishna wears yellow apparel. Krishna\'s complexion is
blue, like a dark cloud; so Radha wears a blue dress; she has also
decked herself with blue sapphires. Radha has tinkling anklets; so
Krishna has them too. In other words, there is inner and outer harmony
between Purusha and Prakriti.\"

As Sri Ramakrishna finished these words, Bankim and his friends began to
whisper in English.

MASTER (smiling, to Bankim and the others): \"Well, gentlemen! What are
you talking about in English?\"

ADHAR: \"We are discussing what you have just said, your explanation of
Krishna\'s form.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"That reminds me of a funny story. It makes me want
to laugh. Once a barber was shaving a gentleman. The latter was cut
slightly by the razor. At once he cried out, \'Damn!\' But the barber
didn\'t know the meaning of the word. He put his razor and other shaving
articles aside, tucked up his shirt-sleeves-it was winter-, and said:
\'You said \"damn\" to me. Now you must tell me its meaning.\' The
gentleman said: \'Don\'t be silly. Go on with your shaving. The word
doesn\'t mean anything in particular; but shave a little more
carefully.\' But the barber wouldn\'t let him off so easily. He said,
\'If \"damn\" means something good, then I am a \"damn\", my father is a
\"damn\", and all my ancestors are \"damns\". (All laugh.) But if it
means something bad, then you are a \"damn\", your father is a \"damn\",
and all your ancestors are \"damns\". (All laugh.) They are not only
\"damns\", but \"damn-damn-damn-da-damn-damn\".\'\"(Loud laughter.)

As the laughter stopped, Bankim began the conversation.

**Master and preaching**

BANKIM: \"Sir, why don\'t you preach?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Preaching? It is only a man\'s vanity that makes him
think of preaching. A man is but an insignificant creature. It is God
alone who will preach-God who has created the sun and moon and so
illumined the universe. Is preaching such a trifling affair? You cannot
preach unless God reveals Himself to you and gives you the command to
preach. Of course, no one can stop you from preaching. You haven\'t
received the command, but still you cry yourself hoarse. People will
listen to you couple of days and then forget all about it. It is like
any other sensation; as long as you speak, people will say, \'Ah! He
speaks well\'; and the moment you stop, everything will disappear.

\"The milk in the pot hisses and swells as long as there is heat under
it. Take away the heat, and the milk will quiet down as before.

**Preaching without God\'s command**

\"One must increase one\'s strength by *sādhanā*; otherwise one cannot
preach. As the proverb goes: \'You have no room to sleep yourself and
you invite a friend to sleep with you.\' There is no place for you to
lie down and you say: \'Come, friend! Come and lie down with me.\'
(Laughter.)

\"Some people used to befoul the bank of the Haldārpukur at Kamarpukur
every morning. The villagers would notice it and abuse the offenders.
But that didn\'t stop it. At last the villagers filed a petition with
the Government. An officer visited the place and put up a sign: \'Commit
no nuisance. Offenders will be punished.\' That stopped it completely.
Afterwards there was no more trouble. It was a government order, and
everyone had to obey it.

\"Likewise, if God reveals Himself to you and gives you the command,
then you can preach and teach people.

Otherwise, who will listen to you?\"

The visitors were listening seriously.

**Life after death**

MASTER (to Bankim): \"I understand you are a great pundit and have
written many books. Please tell me what you think about man\'s duties?
What will accompany him after death? You believe in the hereafter,
don\'t you?\"

BANKIM: \"The hereafter? What is that?\"

MASTER: \"True. When a man dies after attaining Knowledge, he doesn\'t
have to go to another plane of existence; he isn\'t born again. But as
long as he has not attained Knowledge, as long as he has not realized
God, he must come back to the life of this earth; he can never escape
it. For such a person there is a hereafter. A man is liberated after
attaining Knowledge, after realizing God. For him there is no further
coming back to earth. If a boiled paddy-grain is sown, it doesn\'t
sprout. Just so, if a man is boiled by the fire of Knowledge, he cannot
take part any more in the play of creation; he cannot lead a worldly
life, for he has no attachment to \'woman and gold\'. What will you gain
by sowing boiled paddy?\"

BANKIM (smiling): \"Sir, neither does a weed serve the purpose of a
tree.\'

MASTER: \"But you cannot call a Jnāni a weed. He who has realized God
has obtained the fruit of Immortality-not a common fruit like a gourd or
a pumpkin. He is free from rebirth. He is not born anywhere-on earth, in
the solar world, or in the lunar world.

\"Analogy is one-sided. You are a pundit; haven\'t you read logic?
Suppose you say that a man is as terrible as a tiger. That doesn\'t mean
that he has a fearful tail or a tiger\'s pot-face! (All laugh.)

\"I said the same thing to Keshab. He asked me, \'Sir, is there an
after-life?\' I didn\'t commit myself either way. I said that the
potters put their pots in the sun to bake. Among them you see both baked
and soft pots. Sometimes cattle trample over them. When the baked pots
are broken, the potters throw them away; but when the soft ones are
broken they keep them. They mix them with water and put the clay on the
wheel and make new pots. They don\'t throwaway the unbaked pots. So I
said to Keshab: \'The Potter won\'t let you go as long as you are
unbaked. He will put you on the wheel of the world as long as you have
not attained Knowledge, as long as you have not realized Him. He won\'t
let you go. You will have to return to the earth again and again; there
is no escape. You will be liberated only when you realize God. Then
alone will the Potter let you go. It is because then you won\'t serve
any purpose in this world of māyā.\' The Jnāni has gone beyond māyā.
What will he do in this world of māyā?

\"But God keeps some jnanis in the world of māyā to be teachers of men.
In order to teach others the Jnāni lives in the world with the help of
Vidyā-māyā. It is God Himself who keeps the Jnāni in the world for His
work. Such was the case with Sukadeva and Sankaracharya.

**Duties of life**

(To Bankim, smiling) \"Well, what do you say about man\'s duties?\"

BANKIM (smiling): \"If you ask me about them, I should say they are
eating, sleeping, and sex-life.\"

**Master scolds Bankim**

MASTER (sharply): \"Eh? You are very saucy! What you do day and night
comes out through your mouth. A man belches what he eats. If he eats
radish, he belches radish; if he eats green coconut, he belches green
coconut. Day and night you live in the midst of \'woman and gold\'; so
your mouth utters words about that alone. By constantly thinking of
worldly things a man becomes calculating and deceitful. On the other
hand, he becomes guileless by thinking of God. A man who has seen God
will never say what you have just said. What will a pundit\'s
scholarship profit him if he does not think of God and has no
discrimination and renunciation? Of

what use is erudition if the mind dwells on \'woman and gold\'?

\"Kites and vultures soar very high indeed, but their gaze is fixed only
on the charnel-pit. The pundit has no doubt studied many books and
scriptures; he may rattle off their texts, or he may have written books.
But if he is attached to women, if he thinks of money and honour as the
essential things, will you call him a pundit? How can a man be a pundit
if his mind does not dwell on God?

**Devotees and the worldly-minded**

\"Some may say about the devotees: \'Day and night these people speak
about God. They are crazy; they have lost their heads. But how clever we
are! How we enjoy pleasure-money, honour, the senses!\' The crow, too
thinks he is a clever bird; but the first thing he does when he wakes up
in the early morning is to fill his stomach with nothing but others\'
filth. Haven\'t you noticed how he struts about? Very clever indeed!\"

There was dead silence.

Sri Ramakrishna continued: \"But like the swan are those who think of
God, who pray day and night to get rid of their attachment to worldly
things and their love for \'woman and gold\', who do not enjoy anything
except the nectar of the Lotus Feet of the Lord, and to whom worldly
pleasures taste bitter. If you put a mixture of milk and water before
the swan, it will leave the water and drink only the milk. And haven\'t
you noticed the gait of a swan? It goes straight ahead in one direction.
So it is with genuine devotees: they go toward God alone. They seek
nothing else; they enjoy nothing else.

(Tenderly, to Bankim) \"Please don\'t take offence at my words.\"

BANKIM: \"Sir, I haven\'t come here to hear sweet things.\"

MASTER (to Bankim): \"\'Woman and gold\' alone is the world; that alone
is māyā. Because of it you cannot see or think of God. After the birth
of one or two children, husband and wife should live as brother and
sister and talk only of God. Then both their minds will be drawn to God,
and the wife will be a help to the husband on the path of spirituality.
None can taste divine bliss without giving up his animal feeling. A
devotee should pray to God to help him get rid of this feeling. It. must
be a sincere prayer. God is our Inner Controller; He will certainly
listen to our prayer if it is sincere.

\"And \'gold\'. Sitting on the bank of the Ganges below the Panchavati,
I used to say, \'Rupee is clay and clay is rupee;\' Then I threw both
into the Ganges.\"

BANKIM: \"Indeed! Money is clay! Sir, if you have a few pennies you can
help the poor. If money is clay, then a man cannot give in charity or do
good to others.\"

**Charity -The sannyāsi\'s duty**

MASTER (to Bankim): \"Charity! Doing good! How dare you say you can do
good to others? Man struts about so much; but if one pours foul water
into his mouth when he is asleep, he doesn\'t even know it; his mouth
overflows with it. Where are his boasting, his vanity, his pride, then?

\"A sannyāsi must give up \'woman and gold\'; he cannot accept it any
more. One must not swallow one\'s own spittle. When a sannyāsi gives
something to another, he knows that it is not himself who gives.
Kindness belongs to God alone. How can a man lay claim to it? Charity
depends on the will of Rāma. A true sannyāsi renounces \'woman and
gold\' both mentally and outwardly. He who eats no molasses must not
even keep molasses about. If he does, and yet tells others not to eat
it, they won\'t listen to him.

\"A householder, of course, needs money, for he has a wife and children.
He should save up to feed them. They say that the bird and the sannyāsi
should not provide for the future. But the mother bird brings food in
her mouth for her chicks; so she too provides. A householder needs
money. He has to support his family.

**The householder\'s duty**

\"If a householder is a genuine devotee he performs his duties without
attachment; he surrenders the fruit of his work to God-his gain or loss,
his pleasure or pain-and day and night he prays for devotion and for
nothing else. This is called motiveless work, the performance of duty
without attachment. A sannyāsi, too, must do all his work in that spirit
of detachment; but he has no worldly duties to attend to, like a
householder.

\"If a householder gives in charity in a spirit of detachment, he is
really doing good to himself and not to others. It is God alone that he
serves- God, who dwells in all beings; and when he serves God, he is
really doing good to himself and not to others. If a man thus serves God
through all beings, not through men alone but through animals and other
living beings as well; if he doesn\'t seek name and fame, or heaven
after death; if he doesn\'t seek any return from those he serves; if he
can carry on his work of service in this spirit-then he performs truly
selfless work, work without attachment. Through such selfless work he
does good to himself. This is called karma yoga. This too is a way to
realize God. But it is very difficult, and not suited to the Kaliyuga.

\"Therefore I say, he who works in such a detached spirit-who is kind
and charitable-benefits only himself. Helping others, doing good to
others-this is the work of God alone, who for men has created the sun
and moon, father and mother, fruits, flowers, and corn. The love that
you see in parents is God\'s love: He has given it to them to preserve
His creation. The compassion that you see in the kind-hearted is God\'s
compassion: He has given it to them to protect the helpless. Whether you
are charitable or not, He will have His work done somehow or other.
Nothing can stop His work.

\"What then is man\'s duty? What else can it be? It is just to take
refuge in God and to pray to Him with a yearning heart for His vision.

**Difficulty of karma-yoga**

\"Sambhu said to me: \'It is my desire to build a large number of
hospitals and dispensaries. Thus I can do much good to the poor.\' I
said to him: \'Yes, that is not bad if you can do it in a detached
spirit. But to be detached is very difficult unless you sincerely love
God. And further, if you entangle yourself in many activities, you will
be attached to them in a way unknown to yourself. You may think you have
no motive behind your work, but perhaps there has already grown a desire
for fame and the advertising of your name. Then again, if you are
entangled in too many activities, the pressure of them will make you
forget God.\' I also said to him: \'Sambhu, let me ask you one thing. If
God appears before you, will you want Him or a number of hospitals and
dispensaries?\' If one realizes God, one doesn\'t enjoy anything else.
One who has tasted syrup of sugar candy cannot enjoy a drink made from
common treacle.

\"Those who build hospitals and dispensaries, and get pleasure from
that, are no doubt good people; but they are of a different type. He who
is a real devotee of God seeks nothing but God. If he finds himself
entangled in too much work, he earnestly prays, \'Lord, be gracious and
reduce my work; my mind, which should think of Thee day and night, has
been wasting its power; it thinks of worldly things alone.\' Pure-souled
devotees are in a class by themselves. You cannot have real love of God
unless you know that God alone is real and all else illusory. You cannot
have real love of God unless you know that the world is impermanent,
only of two days\' existence, while its Creator alone is real and
eternal. \"Janaka and sages like him worked in the world at the command
of God.

**Spirituality and book-learning**

(To Bankim) \"Some people think that God cannot be realized without the
study of books and scriptures. They think that first of all one should
learn of this world and its creatures; that first of all one should
study \'science\'. (All laugh.) They think that one cannot realize God
without first understanding His creation. Which comes first, \'science\'
or God? What do you say?\"

BANKIM: \"I too think that we should first of all know about the
different things of the world. How can we know of God without knowing
something of this world? We should first learn from books.\"

MASTER: \"That\'s the one cry from all of you. But God comes first and
then the creation. After attaining God you can know everything else, if
it is necessary.

\"If you can somehow get yourself introduced to Jadu Mallick, then you
will be able to learn, if you want to, the number of his houses and
gardens and the amount of his money invested in government securities.
Jadu Mallick himself will tell you all about them. But if you haven\'t
met him and if you are stopped by his door-keepers when you try to enter
his house, then how will you get the correct information about his
houses, gardens, and government securities? When you know God you know
all else; but then you don\'t care to know small things. The same thing
is stated in the Vedas. You talk about the virtues of a person as long
as you haven\'t seen him, but no sooner does he appear before you than
all such talk stops. You are beside yourself with joy simply to be with
him. You feel overwhelmed by simply conversing with him. You don\'t talk
about his virtues any more.

\"First realize God, then think of the creation and other things.
Valmiki was given the name of Rāma to repeat as his mantra, but was told
at first to repeat \'mara\'. \'Ma\' means God and \'ra\' the world.
First God and then the world. If you know one you know all. If you put
fifty zeros after a one, you have a large sum; but erase the one and
nothing remains. It is the one that makes the many. First one, then
many. First God, then His creatures and the world.

**God and the world**

\"The one thing you need is to realize God. Why do you bother so much
about the world, creation, \'science\', and all that? Your business is
to eat mangoes. What need have you to know how many hundreds of trees
there are in the orchard, how many thousands of branches, and how many
millions of leaves? You have come to the garden to eat mangoes. Go and
eat them. Man is born in this world to realize God; it is not good to
forget that and divert the mind to other things. You have come to eat
mangoes. Eat the mangoes and be happy.\"

BANKIM: \"Where do we get the mangoes?\"

MASTER: \"Pray to God with a longing heart. He will surely listen to
your prayer if it is sincere. Perhaps He will direct you to holy men
with whom you can keep company; and that will help you on your spiritual
path. Perhaps someone will tell you, \'Do this and you will attain
God.\'\"

BANKIM: \"Who? The guru? He enjoys all the good mangoes himself and
gives us the bad ones!\" (Laughter.)

MASTER: \"Why should that be so? The mother knows what food suits the
stomachs of her different children. Can all of them digest pilau and
Kalia? Suppose a fish has been procured. The mother doesn\'t give pilau
and Kalia to all the children. For the weak child with a poor stomach
she prepares simple soup. But does that mean she loves him the less?

**Faith in guru**

\"One must have faith in the guru\'s words. The guru is none other than
Satchidananda. God Himself is the Guru. If you only believe his words
like a child, you will realize God. What faith a child has! When a
child\'s mother says to him about a certain man, \'He is your brother\',
the child believes he really is his brother. The child believes it one
hundred and twenty-five percent, though he may be the son of a brahmin,
and the man the son of a blacksmith. The mother says to the child,
\'There is a bugaboo in that room\', and the child really believes there
is a bugaboo in the room. Such is the faith of a child! One must have
this childlike faith in the guru\'s words. God cannot be realized by a
mind that is hypocritical, calculating, or argumentative. One must have
faith and sincerity. Hypocrisy will not do. To the sincere, God is very
near; but He is far, far away from the hypocrite.

**Yearning for God-vision**

\"One must have for God the yearning of a child. The child sees nothing
but confusion when his mother is away. You may try to cajole him by
putting a sweetmeat in his hand; but he will not be fooled. He only
says,

\'No, I want to go to my mother.\' One must feel such yearning for God.
Ah, what yearning! How restless a child feels for his mother! Nothing
can make him forget his mother. He to whom the enjoyment of worldly
happiness appears tasteless, he who takes no delight in anything of the
world-money, name, creature comforts, sense pleasure-, becomes sincerely
grief-stricken for the vision of the Mother. And to him alone the Mother
comes running, leaving all Her other duties.

\"Ah, that restlessness is the whole thing. Whatever path you
follow-whether you are a Hindu, a Mussalman, a Christian, a Sakta, a
Vaishnava, or a Brahmo-the vital point is restlessness. God is our Inner
Guide. It doesn\'t matter if you take a wrong path-only you must be
restless for Him. He Himself will put you on the right path.

\"Besides, there are errors in all paths. Everyone thinks his watch is
right; but as a matter of fact no watch is absolutely right. But that
doesn\'t hamper one\'s work. If a man is restless for God he gains the
company of sādhus and as far as possible corrects his own watch with the
sādhu\'s help.\"

Trailokya of the Brahmo Samaj began to sing. Presently Sri Ramakrishna
stood up and lost consciousness of the outer world. He became completely
indrawn, absorbed in samādhi. The devotees stood around him in a circle.
Pushing aside the crowd, Bankim came near the Master and began to watch
him attentively. He had never seen anyone in samādhi.

After a few minutes Sri Ramakrishna regained partial consciousness and
began to dance in an ecstatic mood. It was a never-to-be-forgotten
scene. Bankim and his Anglicized friends looked at him in amazement. Was
this the God-intoxicated state? The devotees also watched him with
wondering eyes.

The singing and dancing over, the Master touched the ground with his
forehead, saying, \'Bhagavata - Bhakta - Bhagavan! Salutations to the
jnanis, yogis, and bhaktas! Salutations to all!\" He sat down again and
all sat around him.

BANKIM (to the Master): \"Sir, how can one develop divine love?\"

MASTER: \"Through restlessness-the restlessness a child feels for his
mother. The child feels bewildered when he is separated from his mother,
and weeps longingly for her. If a man can weep like that for God he can
even see Him.

\"At the approach of dawn the eastern horizon becomes red. Then one
knows it will soon be sunrise. Likewise, if you see a person restless
for God, you can be pretty certain that he hasn\'t long to wait for His
vision.

\"A disciple asked his teacher, \'Sir, please tell me how I can see
God.\' \'Come with me,\' said the guru, \'and I shall show you.\' He
took the disciple to a lake, and both of them got into the water.
Suddenly the teacher pressed the disciple\'s head under the water. After
a few moments he released him and the disciple raised his head and stood
up. The guru asked him, \'How did you feel?\' The disciple said, \'Oh! I
thought I should die; I was panting for breath.\' The teacher said,
\'When you feel like that for God, then you will know you haven\'t long
to wait for His vision.\'

(To Bankim) \"Let me tell you something. What will you gain by floating
on the surface? Dive a little under the water. The gems lie deep under
the water; so what is the good of throwing your arms and legs about on
the surface? A real gem is heavy. It doesn\'t float; it sinks to the
bottom. To get the real gem you must dive deep.\"

BANKIM: \"Sir, what can we do? We are tied to a cork. It prevents us
from diving.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER: \"All sins vanish if one only remembers God. His name breaks the
fetters of death. You must dive; otherwise you can\'t get the gem.
Listen to a song.\"

The Master sang in his sweet voice:

> *Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God\'s Beauty;*
>
> *If you descend to the uttermost depths,*
>
> *There you will find the gem of Love.*
>
> *Go seek, O mind, go seek Vrindāvan in your heart,*
>
> *Where with His loving devotees*
>
> *Sri Krishna sports eternally.*
>
> *Light up, O mind, light up true wisdom\'s shining lamp,*
>
> *And let it burn with steady flame*
>
> *Unceasingly within your heart.*
>
> *Who is it that steers your boat across the solid earth?*
>
> *It is your guru, says Kubir;*
>
> *Meditate on his holy feet.*
>
> *All listened spellbound. Again Sri Ramakrishna began to talk.*

MASTER (to Bankim): \"There are some who do not want to dive. They say,
\'Won\'t we become deranged if we go to excess about God?\' Referring to
those who are intoxicated with divine love, they say, \'These people
have lost their heads.\' But they don\'t understand this simple thing:
God is the Ocean of Amrita, Immortality. Once I said to Narendra:
\'Suppose there were a cup of syrup and you were a fly. Where would you
sit to drink the syrup?\' Narendra said, \'I would sit on the edge of
the cup and stretch out my neck to drink it.\' \'Why?\' I asked.
\'What\'s the harm of plunging into the middle of the cup and drinking
the syrup?\' Narendra answered, \'Then I should stick in the syrup and
die.\' \'My child,\' I said to him, \'that isn\'t the nature of the
Nectar of Satchidananda. It is the Nectar of Immortality. Man does not
die from diving into It. On the contrary he becomes immortal.\'

\"Therefore I say, dive deep. Don\'t be afraid. By diving deep in God
one becomes immortal.\"

Bankim bowed low before the Master. He was about to take his leave.

BANKIM: \"Sir, I am not such an idiot as you may think. I have a prayer
to make. Please be kind enough to grace my house with the dust of your
holy feet.\"

MASTER: \"That\'s nice. I shall go if God wills.\"

BANKIM: \"There too you will see devotees of God.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"How so? What kind of devotees are they? Are they
like those who said, \'Gopal! Gopal! Kesava! Kesava!\'?\" (All laugh.)

A DEVOTEE: \"What is the story of \'Gopal\', sir?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Let me tell you. At a certain place there is a
goldsmith\'s shop. The workers there are

known as pious Vaishnavas: they have strings of beads around their
necks, religious marks on their foreheads, and bags containing rosaries
in their hands. They repeat the names of God aloud. One can almost call
them sādhus; only they have to work as goldsmiths to earn their bread
and support their wives and children. Many customers, hearing of their
piety, come to the shop because they believe that in that shop there
will be no trickery with their gold or silver. When the customers enter
the shop, they see the workers repeating the name of Hari with their
tongues and doing their work with their hands. No sooner do the
customers take seats in the shop than one of the workers cries out,
\'Kesava! Kesava! Kesava!\' A few minutes later another says, \'Gopal!
Gopal! Gopal!\' After they talk a little while, the third man cries out,
\'Hari! Hari! Hari!\' In the mean time the customers have almost
finished their transactions. Then the fourth exclaims, \'Hara! Hara!
Hara!\' The customers are very much impressed with the devotion and
fervour of the owners and feel themselves quite secure in

handing them the money. They are sure they won\'t be cheated.

\"But do you know what lies behind all this? The man who says \'Kesava!
Kesava!\' after the arrival of the customers means, \'Who are they?\' In
other words, he wants to know how intelligent they are. The man who says
\'Gopal! Gopal!\' means to say he finds them no better than a herd of
cows. The man saying \'Hari! Hari!\' means, \'May I rob them?\'; he
suggests that since they are like a herd of cows they can be robbed. And
the last man, who says \'Hara! Hara!\', replies, \'Yes, rob them.\' He
means that since the customers are like a herd of cows, they can
certainly be robbed. Here, too, you see a group of pious men, very much
devoted to God!\" (All laugh.)

Bankim took his leave; but he was absent-minded. When he reached the
door he discovered that he had dropped his shawl in the room; he was in
his short-sleeves. A gentleman handed him his shawl.

Of the devotees at Adhar\'s house, Sarat and Sannyal were brahmins. But
Adhar belonged to the lower caste of the goldsmiths, and so the two
brahmins quickly left, lest they should be pressed by their host to take
their meal there. Sarat and Sannyal had been coming to the Master only a
short time and did not know how fond the Master was of Adhar. The Master
used to say that. the devotees formed a separate caste by themselves;
among them there could be no caste distinction.

Adhar entertained the Master and the devotees with a feast. It was quite
late in the evening when the devotees returned home, cherishing in their
hearts the image of the Master in his spiritual ecstasy and remembering
his words of great wisdom.

Since Bankim had invited Sri Ramakrishna to visit his home, the Master a
few days later sent Girish and M. to his Calcutta residence. At that
time Bankim had a long discussion with these two devotees about the
Master. He told them that he wanted to visit Sri Ramakrishna again. But
his desire was not fulfilled.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 35**

AT THE STAR THEATRE (II)

> Sunday, December 14,1884

SRI RAMAKRISHNA arrived at the Star Theatre on Beadon Street in Calcutta
to see a play about the life of

Prahlada. M., Baburam, Narayan, and other devotees were with him. The
hall was brightly lighted. The play

had not yet begun. The Master was seated in a box, talking with Girish.

MASTER (smiling): \"Ah! You have written nice plays.\"

**Assimilation of spiritual ideas**

GIRISH: \"But, sir, how little I assimilate! I just write.\"

MASTER: \"No, you assimilate a great deal. The other day I said to you
that no one could sketch a divine character unless he had love of God in
his heart.

\"Yes, one needs to assimilate spiritual ideas. I went to Keshab\'s
house to see the play, Nava-Vrindāvan. I saw a deputy magistrate there
who earned eight hundred rupees a month. Everyone said that he was a
very learned man; but I found him restless because of a boy, his son. He
was very anxious to find a good seat for the boy; he paid no attention
to the spiritual conversation of the players. The boy was pestering him
with questions: \'Father! What is this? What is that?\' He was extremely
busy with the boy. You see, he merely read books; but he didn\'t
assimilate their ideas.\"

GIRISH: \"I often ask myself, \'Why bother about the theatre any
more?\'\"

MASTER: \"No, no! Let things be as they are. People will learn much from
your plays.\"

**Master sees a performance**

The performance began. Prahlada was seen entering the schoolroom as a
student. At the sight of him Sri Ramakrishna uttered once or twice the
word \" Prahlada\" and went into samādhi.

During another scene Sri Ramakrishna wept to see Prahlada under an
elephant\'s feet. He cried when the boy was thrown into the fire.

The scene changed. Lakshmi and Narayana were seen seated in Goloka.
Narayana was worried about Prahlada. This scene, too, threw Sri
Ramakrishna into an ecstatic mood.

After the performance Girish conducted Sri Ramakrishna to his private
room in the theatre. He said to the Master, \"Would you care to see the
farce, *Vivaha Vibhrata* \[The Confusion of Marriage\'\]?\"

MASTER: \"Oh, no! Why something like that after the life of Prahlada? I
once said to the leader of a theatrical troupe, \'End your performance
with some religious talk.\' We have been listening to such wonderful
spiritual conversation; and now to see \'The Confusion of Marriage\'! A
worldly topic! We should become our old selves again. We should return
to our old mood.\"

GIRISH: \"How did you like the performance?\"

MASTER: \"I found that it was God Himself who was acting the different
parts. Those who played the female parts seemed to me the direct
embodiments of the Blissful Mother, and the cowherd boys of Goloka the
embodiments of Narayana Himself. It was God alone who had become all
these.

**Signs of God-vision & Different moods of liberated souls**

\"There are signs by which you can know whether a man has truly seen
God. One of these is joy; there is no hesitancy in him. He is like the
ocean: the waves and sounds are on the surface; below are profound
depths. The man who has seen God behaves sometimes like a madman;
sometimes like a ghoul, without any feeling of purity or impurity;
sometimes like an inert thing, remaining speechless because he sees God
within and without; sometimes like a child, without any attachment,
wandering about unconcernedly with his cloth under his arm. Again, in
the mood of a child, he acts in different ways: sometimes like a boy,
indulging in frivolity; sometimes like a young man, working and teaching
with the strength of a lion.

\"Man cannot see God on account of his ego. You cannot see the sun when
a cloud rises in the sky. But that doesn\'t mean there is no sun; the
sun is there just the same.

\"But there is no harm in the \'ego of a child\'. On the contrary, this
ego is helpful. Greens are bad for the stomach; but hinche is good. So
hinche cannot properly be called greens. Sugar candy, likewise, cannot
be classed with other sweets. Other sweets are injurious to the health,
but not sugar candy.

\"So I said to Keshab, \'If I tell you more than I have already said,
you won\'t be able to keep your organization together.\' That frightened
him. Then I said to him, \'There is no harm in the \"ego of a child\" or
the \"ego of a servant\".\'

\"He who has seen God finds that God alone has become the world and all
its living beings; it is He who has become all. Such a person is called
a superior devotee.\"

**The ego of the devotee & Three classes of devotees**

GIRISH (smiling); \"Yes, God is everything. But the devotee keeps a
trace of ego; that is not harmful.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, there is no harm in that. That trace of ego is
kept in order to enjoy God. You can enjoy divine bliss only when you
make a distinction between yourself and God-the distinction between the
servant and the Master.

\"There is also the devotee of the mediocre class: he sees that God
dwells in all beings as their Inner Guide. But the inferior devotee
says, \'God exists; He is up there\', that is to say, beyond the sky.
(All laugh.)

\"When I saw the cowherd, boys of Goloka in your performance I felt that
God has become all. He who has seen God knows truly that God alone is
the Doer, that it is He who does everything.\"

GIRISH: \"Sir, I know truly that it is God who does everything.\"

MASTER: \"I say, \'O Mother, I am the machine and You are the Operator;
I am inert and You make me conscious; I do as You make me do; I speak as
You make me speak.\' But the ignorant say, \'I am partly responsible,
and God is partly responsible.\' \"

GIRISH: \"Sir, I am not really doing anything. Why should I bother about
work at all?\"

MASTER: \"No, work is good. When the ground is well cultivated and
cleared of stones and pebbles, whatever you plant will grow. But one
should work without any personal motive.

\"There are two types of paramahamsas: the Jnāni and the premi. The
Jnāni is self-centred; he feels that it is enough to have Knowledge for
his own self. The premi, like Sukadeva, after attaining his own
realization, teaches men. Some eat mangoes and wipe off the traces from
their mouths; but some share their mangoes with others. Spades and
baskets are needed to dig a well. After the digging is over, some throw
the spades and baskets into the well. But others put them away; for a
neighbour may use them. Sukadeva and a few others kept the spades and
baskets for the benefit of others. (To Girish) You should do the same.\"

GIRISH: \"Please bless me, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Have faith in the Divine Mother and you will attain every
thing.\"

GIRISH: \"But I am a sinner.\"

MASTER: \"The wretch who constantly harps on sin becomes a sinner.\"

GIRISH: \"Sir, the very ground where I used to sit would become
unholy.\"

MASTER: \"How can you say that? Suppose a light is brought into a room
that has been dark a thousand years; does it illumine the room little by
little, or all in a flash?\"

GIRISH: \"Then you have blessed me.\"

MASTER: \"If you sincerely believe it. What more shall I say? I eat and
drink and chant the name of God.\"

GIRISH: \"I have no sincerity. Please give it to me.\"

MASTER: \"I? Sages like Nārada and Sukadeva could have done that.\"

GIRISH: \"I don\'t see Nārada and Sukadeva . \'But you are here before
me.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"All right. You have faith.\"

All remained silent. The conversation began again.

GIRISH: \"I have one desire: love of God for its own sake.\"

MASTER: \"Only the Isvarakotis have such love. It is not for ordinary
men.\"

All sat in silence. The Master began to sing in an absent-minded mood,
his gaze turned upward:

> *Can everyone have the vision of Syama? Is Kāli\'s treasure for
> everyone?*
>
> *Oh, what a pity my foolish mind will not see what is true!*
>
> *Even with all His penances, rarely does Śiva Himself behold*
>
> *The mind-bewitching sight of Mother Syama\'s crimson feet.*
>
> *To him who meditates on Her the riches of heaven are poor indeed; If
> Syama casts Her glance on him, he swims in Eternal Bliss.*
>
> *The Prince of yogis, the King of the gods, meditate on Her feet in
> vain; Yet worthless Kamalakanta yearns for the Mother\'s blessed
> feet!*

Girish repeated:

> *Yet worthless Kamalakanta yearns for the Mother\'s blessed feet!*

**Restlessness for God-vision**

MASTER (to Girish): \"One can realize God through intense renunciation.
But the soul must be restless for Him, as restless as one feels for a
breath of air when one\'s head is pressed under water.

\"A man can see God if he unites in himself the force of these three
attractions: the attraction of worldly possessions for the worldly man,
the husband\'s attraction for the chaste wife, and the child\'s
attraction for its

mother. If you can unite these three forms of love and give it all to
God, then you can see Him at once.

> *Cry to your Mother Syama with a real cry, O mind!*
>
> *And how can She hold Herself from you?*

\"If a devotee prays to God with real longing, God cannot help revealing
Himself to him.

\"The other day I told you the meaning of bhakti. It is to adore God
with body, mind, and words. \'With body\' means to serve and worship God
with one\'s hands, go to holy places with one\'s .feet, hear the
chanting of the name and glories of God with one\'s ears, and behold the
divine image with one\'s eyes. \'With mind\' means to contemplate and
meditate on God constantly and to remember and think of His lila. \'With
words\' means to sing hymns to Him and chant His name and glories.

\"Devotion as described by Nārada is suited to the Kaliyuga. It means to
chant constantly the name and glories of God. Let those who have no
leisure worship God at least morning and evening by whole-heartedly
chanting His name and clapping their hands.

\"The \'ego of a devotee\' begets no pride; it does not create
ignorance. On the contrary it helps one realize God. This ego is no more
like the ordinary ego than hinche is like ordinary greens. One generally
becomes indisposed by eating greens; but hinche removes excessive bile;
it does one good. Sugar candy is not like ordinary sweets. Sweets are
generally harmful, but sugar candy removes acidity.

\"Nishtha leads to bhakti; bhakti, when mature, becomes bhava; bhava,
when concentrated, becomes mahabhava; and last of all is prema. Prema is
like a cord: by prema God is bound to the devotee; He can no longer run
away. An ordinary man can at best achieve bhava. None but an Isvarakoti
attains mahabhava and prema. Chaitanyadeva attained them.

\"What is the meaning of jnanayoga? It is the path by which a man can
realize the true nature of his own Self; it is the awareness that
Brahman alone is his true nature. Prahlada sometimes was aware of his
identity with Brahman. And sometimes he would see that God was one and
he another; at such times he would remain in the mood of bhakti.

\"Hanuman said, \'O Rāma, sometimes I find that You are the whole and I
a part, sometimes that You are the Master and I Your servant; but, O
Rāma, when I have the Knowledge of Reality, I see that You are I and I
am You.\'\"

GIRISH: \"Ah!\"

**Worldly man\'s spiritual discipline**

MASTER: \"Why shouldn\'t a man be able to realize God in the world? But
he must have discrimination and dispassion; he must have the unshakable
awareness that God alone is real and all else is unreal and has but a
two days\' existence. It will not do to float on the surface. You must
dive deep.\" With these words, the Master sang:

> *Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God\'s Beauty; If you
> descend to the uttermost depths, There you will find the gem of Love.
> . . .*

MASTER: \"You must remember another thing: in the ocean there is danger
of alligators, that is to say, of lust and the like.\"

GIRISH: \"I am not afraid of the King of Death.\"

MASTER: \"But I am speaking of the danger of the alligators of lust and
the like. Because of them one should

smear one\'s body with turmeric before diving in-the turmeric of
discrimination and dispassion.

\"Some attain knowledge of God in the world. Mention is made of two
classes of yogis: the hidden and the known. Those who have renounced the
world are \'known\' yogis: all recognize them. But the \'hidden\' yogis
live in the world. They are not known. They are like the maidservant who
performs her duties in the house but whose mind is fixed on her children
in the country. They are also, as I have told you, like the loose woman
who performs her household duties zealously but whose mind constantly
dwells on her lover. It is very hard to cultivate discrimination and
dispassion. It is not easy to get rid of the idea, \'I am the master and
all these are mine.\' I saw a deputy magistrate, who earns a salary of
eight hundred rupees, paying no attention to a religious discourse. He
had brought one of his children with him and was busy finding a good
place for him to sit. I know another man, whom I shall not name, who
used to devote a great deal of time to japa; but he bore false witness
in court for the sake of ten thousand rupees. Therefore I say that a man
can realize God in the world, too, but only if he has discrimination and
dispassion.\"

**Master and Girish**

GIRISH: \"What will happen to this sinner?\"

Sri Ramakrishna sang in a tender voice, turning his eyes upward:

> *Meditate on the Lord, the Slayer of hell\'s dire woes,*
>
> *He who removes the fear of death;*
>
> *Thinking of Him, the soul is freed from worldly grief*
>
> *And sails across the sea of life in the twinkling of an eye.*
>
> *Consider, O my mind, why you have come to earth;*
>
> *What gain is there in evil thoughts and deeds?*
>
> *Your way lies not through these: perform your penance here*
>
> *By meditating long and deep on the everlasting Lord.*

MASTER: \"\'Sails across the sea of life in the twinkling of an eye.\'
One attains the vision of God if Mahamaya steps aside from the door.
Mahamaya\'s grace is necessary: hence the worship of Śakti. You see, God
is near us, but it is not possible to know Him because Mahamaya stands
between. Rāma, Lakshmana, and Sita were walking along. Rāma walked
ahead, Sita in the middle, and Lakshmana last. Lakshmana was only two
and a half cubits away from Rāma, but he couldn\'t see Rāma because
Sita-Mahamaya-was in the way.

\"While worshipping God, one should assume a definite attitude. I have
three attitudes: the attitude of a child, the attitude of a maidservant,
and the attitude of a friend. For a long time I regarded myself as a
maidservant and a woman companion of God; at that time I used to wear
skirts and ornaments, like a woman. The attitude of a child is very
good.

\"The attitude of a \'hero\' is not good. Some people cherish it. They
regard themselves as Purusha and woman as Prakriti; they want to
propitiate woman through intercourse with her. But this method often
causes disaster.\"

GIRISH: \"At one time I too cherished that idea.\"

Sri Ramakrishna looked at Girish pensively.

GIRISH: \"I still have that twist in my mind. Tell me what I should
do.\"

Sri Ramakrishna reflected a minute and said, \"Give God your power of
attorney. Let Him do whatever He likes.\"

The conversation then turned to Sri Ramakrishna\'s young devotees.

MASTER (to Girish and the others): \"In meditation I see the inner
traits of these youngsters. They have no thought of acquiring house and
property. They do not crave sex pleasure. Those of the youngsters who
are married do not sleep with their wives. The truth is that unless a
man has got rid of rajas and has acquired sattva, he cannot steadily
dwell in God; he cannot love God and realize Him.\"

GIRISH: \"You have blessed me.\"

MASTER: \"How is that? I said that you would succeed if you were
sincere.\"

Saying this, the Master exclaimed, \"Ānandamayi!\" and went into
samādhi. He remained in that state a long time. Regaining partial
consciousness, he said, \"Where are those rascals?\" M. brought Baburam
to him. Sri Ramakrishna looked at Baburam and the other devotees and
said, still in ecstasy.

\"The bliss of Satchidananda is indeed good; but what about the bliss of
divine inebriation?\"

He began to sing:

> *Once for all, this time, I have thoroughly understood;*
>
> *From One who knows it well, I have learnt the secret of bhava. . . .*

Again he sang:

> *Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas, So
> long as I can breathe my last with Kāli\'s name upon my lips? .. .*

The Master continued, saying, \"While praying to the Divine Mother, I
said, \'O Mother, I don\'t seek anything else: give me only pure love
for Thee.\' \"

Sri Ramakrishna was pleased with Girish\'s calm mood. He said to him,
\"This mood of yours is good; the calm mood is the best.\"

The Master was seated in the manager\'s room. A man entered and said,
\"Will you see the farce. \'The Confusion of Marriage\'? It is being
played now.\"

Sri Ramakrishna said to Girish: \"What have you done? This farce after
the life of Prahlada! First sweets and rice pudding and then a dish of
bitter herbs!\"

After the theatre, the actresses, following Girish\'s instructions, came
to the room to salute Sri Ramakrishna. They bowed before him, touching
the ground with their foreheads. The devotees noticed that some of the
actresses, in saluting the Master, touched his feet. He said to them
very tenderly, \"Please don\'t do that, mother!\"

After the actresses had left the room, Sri Ramakrishna said to the
devotees, \"It is all He, only in different forms.\"

The carriage was ready at the door. Girish and the others came to the
street to see the Master off. As soon as Sri Ramakrishna stepped into
the carriage, he went into deep samādhi. Narayan and several other
devotees were with him. The carriage started for Dakshineswar.

**Saturday, December 27, 1884**

It was the Christmas season. Taking advantage of the holiday, many
devotees came to the temple garden to visit the Master, some of them
arriving in the morning. Among these were Kedār, Ram, Nityagopal, Tārak,
Surendra, M., Sarada Prasanna, and a number of young devotees. This was
Sarada Prasanna\'s first visit. .

MASTER (to M.): \"Where is Bankim? Haven\'t you brought him with you?\"

Bankim was a school boy whom Sri Ramakrishna had met in Bagh bazar.
Noticing him even from a distance, the Master had said that he was a
fine boy.

After a while Sri Ramakrishna went to the Panchavati with the devotees.
They surrounded him, some sitting and some standing. He was seated on
the cement platform around the tree, facing the southwest. He asked M.
with a smile, \"Have you brought the book?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Read a little to me.\"

The devotees were eager to know the name of the book. It was called
**Devi Choudhurani**. The Master had heard that the book dealt with
motiveless action. He had also heard of the great renown of its author,
Bankim Chandra Chatterji, whom he had met some days before, and he
wanted to gauge the author\'s mind from the book.

M. said: \"A young girl-the heroine-fell into the hands of a robber
named Bhavani Pathak. Her name had been Prafulla, but the robber changed
it to \'Devi Choudhurani\'. At heart Bhavani was a good man. He made
Prafulla go through many spiritual disciplines; he also taught her how
to perform selfless action. He robbed wicked people and with that money
fed the poor and helpless. He said to Prafulla, \'I chastise the wicked
and protect the virtuous.\'\"

MASTER: \"But that is a king\'s duty.\"

1.  \"In one place the author writes of bhakti. Bhavani Pathak sent a
    girl named Nishi to keep Prafulla company. Nishi was full of piety
    and looked on Krishna as her husband. Prafulla was already married;
    she had lost her father and lived with her mother. The neighbours
    had created a scandal about her character and avoided her, and so
    her father-in-law had not allowed her to live with his son. Later
    her husband had married again; but Prafulla was extremely devoted to
    her husband.

(To Sri Ramakrishna) \"Now, sir, you can follow the story.\"

M. read:

NISHI: \"I am a daughter of Bhavani Pathak. He is my father. He has
also, in a way, given me in marriage.\"

PRAFULLA: \"What do you mean?\"

NISHI: \"I have surrendered my all to Krishna.\"

PRAFULLA: \"How is that?\"

NISHI: \"My beauty, youth, and soul.\"

PRAFULLA: \"Then He is your husband.\"

NISHI: \"Yes, because he alone is my husband who completely possesses
me.\"

PRAFULLA (with a sigh): \"I do not know. You talk that way because you
do not know what a husband is. If you had a real husband, you could
never have liked Sri Krishna.

The foolish Brajeswar-Prafulla\'s husband-was unaware that his wife
loved him so much.

NISHI: \"All can love Sri Krishna, because He has infinite
beauty,infinite youth, and infinite splendour.\"

This young lady was a disciple of Bhavani and well-versed in logic.But
Prafulla was illiterate; she could not answer Nishi\'s arguments.But the
writers of the Hindu social laws knew the reply. God is infinite,no
doubt; but one cannot keep the infinite in the small cage of the heart.
One can do so only with the finite. Therefore the infinite Creator of
the universe is worshipped by the Hindu in the cage of his heart as Sri
Krishna, the finite Personal God. The husband of a woman has a still
more definite form. Therefore if the wife cherishes pure conjugal love,
the husband becomes the first step toward God. Hence the husband is the
only Deity to the Hindu woman. Other societies are inferior to Hindu
society in this respect.

Prafulla was an ignorant girl; she could not understand Nishi\'s
arguments. She said, \"Friend, I do not understand all these arguments;
but you haven\'t yet told me your name.\"

NISHI: \"Bhavani Pathak has given me the name of Nishi, Night. I am the
sister of Diva, Day. One day I shall introduce my sister to you. Let me
continue what I was saying. God alone is the real Husband; and to a
woman the husband is her only God. Sri Krishna is the God of all. Why
should we cherish two Deities, two Gods? If you divide to little bhakti
of this small heart, how little there will be!\"

PRAFULLA: \"Don\'t be silly. Is there any limit to a woman\'s bhakti?\"

NISHI: \"There is no end to a woman\'s love. But bhakti is one thing,
and love another\"

Summarizing part of the book, M. said that Bhavani initiated Prafulla
into spiritual life.

He continued reading:

During the first year Bhavani did not allow any man to enter Prafulla\'s
house nor did he allow her to speak to any man outside the house. During
the second year the rule about speaking was withdrawn, but no man was
allowed inside her house. In the third year Prafulla shaved her head.
Now Bhavani allowed his select disciples to see her. The shaven-headed
disciple would converse with them on scriptural topics, keeping her eyes
cast on the ground.

M. then read that Prafulla began the study of the scriptures; that she
finished grammar and read Raghuvamsa, Kumara Sambhava, Sakuntala, and
Naishadha; and that she studied a little of the Samkhya, Vedānta, and
Nyaya philosophies.

**Master and book-learning**

MASTER: \"Do you know what that means? People like the author of this
book believe that knowledge is impossible without the study of books.
They think that first comes the knowledge of books and then comes the
knowledge of God. In order to know God one must read books! But if I
want to know Jadu Mallick, must I first know the number of his houses
and the amount of money he has in government securities? Do I really
need all this information? Rather I should somehow enter his house, be
it by flattering his gate-keepers or by disregarding their rough
treatment, and talk to Jadu Mallick himself. Then, if I want to know
about his wealth or possessions, I shall only have to ask him about
them. Then it will be a very easy matter for me.

**First God and then the world**

First comes Rāma, then His riches, that is, the universe, This is why
Valmiki repeated the mantra, \'mara\'. \'Ma\' means God, and \'ra\' the
world, that is to say, His riches.\"

The devotees listened to the Master\'s words with rapt attention.

M. continued with the story of Prafulla:

Prafulla finished her studies and then practised spiritual austerity for
many days. Then one day Bhavani visited her; he wanted to instruct her
about selfless work. He quoted to her from the Gitā : \"Therefore do
thou always perform obligatory actions without attachment; by performing
action without attachment one attains to the highest.\"

He told her the three characteristics of disinterested action: first,
control of the sense-organs; second, absence of egotism; and third,
surrendering the fruit of action to Sri Krishna. He further told her
that no dharma is possible for the egotistic person. Quoting from the
Gitā, he said: \"The *Gunās* of Prakriti perform all action. With the
understanding deluded by egotism, man thinks, I am the doer.\"

Bhavani next spoke to her about surrendering the fruit of action to Sri
Krishna. Again he quoted from the Gitā

1.  \"Whatever thou doest, whatever thou eatest, whatever thou givest
    away, whatever austerity thou practisest, O son of Kunti, do that as
    an offering unto Me.\"

MASTER: \"This is fine. These are the words of the Gitā; one cannot
refute them. But something else must be noted. The author speaks about
surrendering the fruit of action to Sri Krishna, but not about
cultivating bhakti for Him.\"

M: \"No, that is not especially mentioned here.

\"Next Prafulla and Bhavani talked about the use of money. Prafulla said
that she offered all her wealth to Krishna.\"

M. read from the book again.

PRAFULLA: \"Like my actions, I offer all my wealth to Sri Krishna.\"

BHAVANI: \"All?\"

PRAFULLA: \"Yes, all.\"

BHAVANI: \"In that case you won\'t he able to perform action in a
detached spirit. If you have to work to earn your food, you will be
attached to that work. Hence there are two alternatives before you:
either you will have to get your food by begging, or you will have to
live on your money. Even a beggar becomes attached to the alms he
receives; therefore you must use your own money to maintain your body.\"

M. (to the Master, smiling): \"That is the nature of the calculating
mind.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, that is the nature of the calculating mind; that is the
way the worldly man thinks. But he who seeks God plunges headlong; he
doesn\'t calculate about how much or how little he needs for the
protection of his body.\"

1.  \"Next Bhavani asked Prafulla, \'How will you offer all this money
    to Sri Krishna?\' Prafulla said: \'Why, Sri Krishna dwells in all
    beings. I shall distribute the money among them.\' Bhavani answered,
    \'Good! Good!\'

\"Quoting from the Gitā , Bhavani said: \'He who sees Me in all things
and all things in Me, never becomes separated from Me, nor do I become
separated from him. That yogi who, established in unity, worships Me
dwelling in all beings, abides in Me, whatever his mode of life. O
Arjuna, that yogi is regarded as the highest who judges the pleasure and
pain of all beings by the same standard that he applies to himself.\"

MASTER: \"These are the characteristics of the highest bhakta.\"

M. again read from the book:

A man must work hard if he wants to help all beings with charity. Hence
it is necessary for him to make a little display of clothes, of pomp and
luxury. Therefore Bhavani said, \"A little shop-keeping is necessary.\"

MASTER (sharply): \"\'A little shopkeeping is necessary!\' One speaks as
one thinks. If a man thinks of worldly things day and night, and deals
with people hypocritically, then his words are coloured by his thoughts.
If one eats radish, one belches radish. Instead of talking about
\'shopkeeping\', he should rather have said, \'A man should act as if he
were the doer, knowing very well that he is really not the doer.\' The
other day a man was singing here. The song contained words like
\'profit\' and \'loss\'. I stopped him. If one contemplates a particular
subject day and night, one cannot talk of anything else.\"

The reading continued. The author was describing the realization of God.
Prafulla had become Devi Choudhurani. It was the month of Vaiśākh. Devi
was seated on the roof of her house-boat talking with Diva and another
woman companion. The moon was up. The boat had cast anchor in the
Ganges. The conversation turned to the question of whether one could see
God. Devi said, \"As the aroma of a flower is directly perceived by the
nose, so God is directly perceived by the mind.\"

At this point the Master interrupted and said: \"Yes, God is directly
perceived by the mind, but not by this ordinary mind. It is the pure
mind that perceives God, and at that time this ordinary mind does not
function. A mind that has the slightest trace of attachment to the world
cannot be called pure. When all the impurities of the mind are removed,
you may call that mind Pure Mind or Pure Ātman.\"

M: \"The author says a little later that God cannot easily be perceived
by the mind.

He says that one needs a telescope to have that direct vision. Yoga is
the telescope. Yoga, as it is described in the Gitā , is of three kinds:
jnāna, bhakti, and karma. One is able to see God through this telescope
of yoga.\"

MASTER: \"That is very good. These are the words of the Gitā.\"

1.  \"At last Devi Choudhurani met her husband. She showed him great
    devotion and said to him: \'You are my God. I wanted to learn the
    worship of another God but I did not succeed. You have taken the
    place of all gods.\' \"

MASTER (smiling): \"\'I did not succeed.\' This is the dharma of a woman
totally devoted to her husband. This also is a path.\"

The reading was over. The Master was smiling. The devotees looked at
him, eagerly waiting to hear what he would say.

MASTER (to the devotees, smiling): \"This is not so bad; it is called
the dharma of chastity, the single-minded devotion of a wife to her
husband. If God can be worshipped through an image, why shouldn\'t it be
possible to worship Him through a living person? It is God Himself who
sports in the world as men.

**Master\'s spiritual experiences**

\"Oh, what a state I passed through! I passed some days absorbed in Śiva
and Durga; some days absorbed in Radha and Krishna, and some days
absorbed in Sita and Rāma. Assuming Radha\'s attitude, I would cry for
Krishna, and assuming Sita\'s attitude, I would cry for Rāma.

\"But lila is by no means the last word. Passing through all these
states, I said to the Divine Mother: \'Mother, in these states there is
separation. Give me a state where there is no separation.\' Then I
remained for some time absorbed in the Indivisible Satchidananda. I
removed the pictures of the gods and goddesses from my room. I began to
perceive God in all beings. Formal worship dropped away. You see that
bel-tree. I used to go there to pluck its leaves. One day, as I plucked
a leaf, a bit of the bark came off. I found the tree full of
Consciousness. I felt grieved because I had hurt the tree. One day I
tried to pluck some *Durva* grass, but I found I couldn\'t do it very
well. Then I forced myself to pluck it.

\"I cannot cut a lemon. The other day I managed to cut one only with
great difficulty; I chanted the name of Kāli and cut the fruit as they
slaughter an animal before the Goddess. One day I was about to gather
some flowers.

They were everywhere on the trees. At once I had a vision of Virat; it
appeared that His worship was just over.

The flowers looked like a bouquet placed on the head of the Deity. I
could not pluck them.

\"God sports through man as well. I see man as the embodiment of
Narayana. As fire is kindled when you rub two pieces of wood together,
so God can be seen in man if you have intense devotion. If there is
suitable bait, big fish like carp gulp it down at once. When one is
intoxicated with prema, one sees God in all beings. The gopis saw
Krishna in everything; to them the whole world was filled with Krishna.
They said that they themselves were Krishna. They were then in a
God-intoxicated state. Looking at the trees, they said, \'These are
hermits absorbed in meditation on Krishna.\' Looking at the grass they
said, \'The hair of the earth is standing on end at the touch of
Krishna.\'

\"Devotion to the husband is also a dharma. The husband is God. Why
shouldn\'t it be so? If God can be worshipped through an image, why not
also through a living man? But three things are necessary in order to
feel the presence of God in an image: first, the devotion of the priest;
second, a beautiful image; and third, the devotion of the householder.
Vaishnavcharan once said that in the end the mind of the devotee is
absorbed in the human manifestation of God.

\"But you must remember one thing. One cannot see God sporting as man
unless one has had the vision of Him. Do you know the sign of one who
has God-vision? Such a man acquires the nature of a child. Why a child?
Because God is like a child. So he who sees God becomes like a child.

\"God-vision is necessary. Now the question is, how can one get it?
Intense renunciation is the means. A man should have such intense
yearning for God that he can say, \'O Father of the universe, am I
outside Your universe? Won\'t You be kind to me, You wretch?\' .

\"You partake of the nature of him on whom you meditate. By worshipping
Śiva you acquire the nature of Śiva. A devotee of Rāma meditated on
Hanuman day and night. He used to think he had become Hanuman. In the
end he was firmly convinced that he had even grown a little tail. Jnāna
is the characteristic of Śiva, and bhakti of Vishnu. One who partakes of
Śiva\'s nature becomes a Jnāni, and one who partakes of Vishnu\'s nature
becomes a bhakta.\"

**Chaitanya & The Divine Incarnation and the ordinary man**

M: \"But what about Chaitanyadeva? You said he had both knowledge and
devotion.\"

MASTER (sharply): \"His case was different. He was an Incarnation of
God. There is a great difference between him and an ordinary man. The
fire of Chaitanya\'s renunciation was so great that when Sarvabhauma
poured sugar on his tongue, instead of melting, it evaporated into air.
He was always absorbed in samādhi. How great was his conquest of lust!
To compare him with a man! A lion eats meat and yet it mates only once
in twelve years; but a sparrow eats grain and it indulges in sex-life
day and night. Such is the difference between a Divine Incarnation and
an ordinary human being. An ordinary man renounces lust; but once in a
while he forgets his vow. He cannot control himself.

(To M) :\"He who has realized God looks on man as a mere worm. \'One
cannot succeed in religious life if one has shame, hatred, or fear.\'
These are fetters. Haven\'t you heard of the eight fetters?

\"How can one who is eternally perfect be afraid of the world? He knows
how to play his game. An eternally perfect soul can even lead a worldly
life if he desires. There are people who can fence with two swords at
the same time; they are such expert fencers that, if stones are thrown
at them, the stones hit the swords and

come back.\"

**Yoga and God-vision**

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, how can one see God?\"

MASTER: \"Can you ever see God if you do not direct your whole mind
toward Him? The Bhagavata speaks about Sukadeva. When he walked about he
looked like a soldier with fixed bayonet. His gaze did not wander; it
had only one goal and that was God. This is the meaning of yoga.

\"The chatak bird drinks only rain-water. Though the Ganges, the Jamuna,
the Godavari, and all other rivers are full of water, and though the
seven oceans are full to the brim, still the chatak will not touch them.
It will drink only the water that falls from the clouds.

\"He who has developed such yoga can see God. In the theatre the
audience remains engaged in all kinds of conversation, about home,
office, and school, till the curtain goes up; but no sooner does it go
up than all conversation comes to a stop, and the people watch the play
with fixed attention. If after a long while someone utters a word or
two, it is about the play.

\"After a drunkard has drunk his liquer, he talks only about the joy of
drunkenness.\"

Nityagopal was seated in front of Sri Ramakrishna. He was always in
ecstasy. He sat there in silence.

MASTER (to Nityagopal, smiling): \"Gopal! Why are you always silent?\"
Nityagopal answered like a child, \"I-do-not-know.\"

MASTER: \"I understand why you don\'t say anything; perhaps you are
afraid of committing a transgression. You are right. Jaya and Vijaya
were gate-keepers for Narayana. They refused Sanaka, Sanātana, and other
rishis' admission into His palace. For this transgression, Jaya and
Vijaya had to be born three times on earth.

\"Again, there is the instance of Sridāmā; he was Viraja\'s gate-keeper
in Goloka. Sri Krishna was in Virajā\'s house. Rādhika went there to
surprise Krishna and wanted to enter the house. Sridāmā would not admit
her, and so Radhika cursed him to be born as a demon on earth. But
Sridāmā, too, cursed her.

\"But there is one thing you should remember. When a boy walks holding
his father\'s hand, he may fall into the gutter; but what has he to fear
if the father holds him by the hand?\"

**The story of Sridāmā is narrated in the *Brahma-vaivarta Purana*.**

Kedār, who was a government official, had been living at Dāccā for
sometime. He had been transferred there from Calcutta. He was a devotee
of Sri Ramakrishna and had gathered together at Dāccā many devotees, who
came to him regularly for spiritual instruction. As one should not come
empty handed to a religious man, the devotees would bring Kedār sweets
and other offerings.

KEDĀR (to the Master, humbly): \"Should I eat those offerings?\"

MASTER: \"It won\'t injure you if the offerings are given out of love
for God. But they are harmful if they are given with any selfish
motive.\"

KEDĀR: \"I have explained everything to the devotees and now I feel
relieved. I have told them that he who has given me his blessing knows
all.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"That is true. You see, people of all sorts come
here. So they find here different things.\"

*sādhanā*.

KEDĀR: \"I do not need to know different things.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Why not? One should know a little of everything. If
a man starts a grocery-shop, he keeps all kinds of articles there,
including a little lentil and tamarind. An expert musician knows how to
play a little on all instruments.\"

Sri Ramakrishna left the room and went toward the pine-grove. The
devotees began to walk about in the garden. Several went to the
Panchavati. Sri Ramakrishna met them there and said: \"I have
indigestion. I took a meal at the Mallicks\'. They are very worldly
people.\"

A few of the Master\'s personal things lay scattered on the cement
platform of the Panchavati, and he asked M.

to bring them. He proceeded to his room and the devotees followed.

In the afternoon the Master rested awhile. Afterwards a few devotees
arrived. The Master sat on the small couch reclining against a pillow.

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, can one know God\'s attributes through the
intellect?\"

MASTER: \"Certainly not by this ordinary intellect. Can one know God so
easily? One must practise

One must also adopt a particular attitude toward God, for instance, the
attitude of a servant toward his master. The rishis of old had the
attitude of Śānta. Do you know the attitude of the jnanis? It is to
meditate on one\'s own Self. (To a devotee, with a smile) What is your
attitude?\"

The devotee gave no answer.

MASTER (smiling): \"You have two attitudes: you meditate on your own
Self and also cherish toward God the attitude of a servant. Am I not
right?\"

DEVOTEE (hesotating and smiling): \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"You see, as Hazra says, I can read people\'s
thoughts.

\"One can maintain those two attitudes only at a very advanced stage.
Prahlada maintained them. But one must work hard in order to practise
this ideal.

\"Let me give an illustration. Suppose a man is grasping the thorny
branch of a plum-tree. His hand bleeds profusely; but he says, \'There
is nothing the matter with me; I am not hurt.\' If you ask him about his
wound, he will say, \'It\'s all right; I am quite well.\' Now is there
any meaning in the mere utterance of these words? One must practise
discipline in keeping with this ideal.\"

The devotees were giving their whole attention to what the Master was
saying.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 36**

THE MASTER\'S BIRTHDAY

> Sunday, February 22, 1885

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting on the northeast verandah outside his room
at Dakshineswar. It was about

eight o\'clock in the morning. Many devotees, including Narendra, Rākhāl
, Girish, Baburam, and Surendra, were

present. They were celebrating the Master\'s birthday, which had fallen
on the previous Monday. M. arrived and

saluted him. The Master signed to him to take a seat near him.

Narottam was singing kirtan. Sri Ramakrishna was in partial ecstasy. The
subject was Krishna\'s meeting with His cowherd friends in the meadow.
Krishna had not yet arrived. The cowherd boys were restless for Him. One
of them said that Mother Yaśoda was preventing Krishna from coming.
Balāi \[Balaram's pet name\] said in a determined voice that he would
bring Krishna with the sound of his horn. Balāi\'s love for Krishna knew
no bounds. The music went on. The cowherd boys and girls heard
Krishna\'s flute and were filled with spiritual emotion.

**Master\'s love for Narendra**

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna\'s eyes fell on Narendra, who was sitting very
near him. He stood up and went into samādhi; he stood there touching
Narendra\'s knee with his foot. Regaining consciousness he took his seat
again. Narendra left the room. The music went on.

Sri Ramakrishna whispered to Baburam: \"There is *Kshir* \[sweet milk
preparation\] in the room. Give Narendra some.\"

Did the Master see Narendra as the embodiment of God?

After the kirtan Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room. Tenderly he began
to feed Narendra with sweets. It was Girish\'s belief that God Himself
had been born in the person of Sri Ramakrishna.

GIRISH (to the Master): \"Your ways are like Krishna\'s. He too
pretended many things to His mother Yaśoda.\"

MASTER: \"True. It was because Krishna was an Incarnation of God. When
God is born as a man He acts that way. You see, Krishna easily lifted
the hill of Govardhan with His hand, but He made Nanda believe that He
found it very hard to carry a footstool.\"

GIRISH: \"Yes, sir, I have understood you now.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch. It was about eleven
o\'clock. Ram and the other devotees wanted to dress him in a new cloth.
The Master said, \"No, no.\" Pointing to an English-educated man, he
said \"What will he say about it?\" At the earnest request of the
devotees he said \"Well, since you insist, I shall have to agree.\"

The devotees were arranging the Master\'s meal in the room. He asked
Narendra to sing.

Narendra sang:

> *In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles;*
>
> *Therefore the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave.*
>
> *In the lap of boundless dark, on Mahanirvana\'s waves upborne,*
>
> *Peace flows serene and inexhaustible.*
>
> *Taking the form of the Void, in the robe of darkness wrapped,*
>
> *Who art Thou, Mother, seated alone in the shrine of samādhi?*
>
> *From the Lotus of Thy fear-scattering Feet flash Thy love\'s
> lightnings;*
>
> *Thy Spirit-Face shines forth with laughter terrible and loud!*

**Master\'s samādhi**

As Narendra sang the line, *\"Who art Thou, Mother, seated alone in the
shrine of samādhi?\",* Sri Ramakrishna

went into deep samādhi and lost all outer consciousness. After a long
time, when he was regaining partial consciousness, the devotees seated
him on the carpet and placed a plate of food before him. Still overcome
with divine emotion, he began to eat the rice with both hands. He said
to Bhavanāth, \"Feed me.\" Because of his ecstatic mood he could not use
his own right hand. Bhavanāth began to feed him Sri Ramakrishna could
eat very little. Rām said to him, \"Nityagopāl will eat from your
plate.\"

MASTER: \"Why from my plate? Why?\"

RAM: \"Why not?\"

Nityagopal was also in an ecstatic mood. The Master put a morsel or two
into his mouth with his own hand.

Some devotees from Konnagar arrived by boat. They entered Sri
Ramakrishna\'s room singing kirtan; afterwards they went out to take
some refreshments. Narottam was in the room. The Master said to him and
the other devotees: \"The music of the Konnagar devotees was dull. Music
should be so lively as to make everyone dance. One should sing a song
like this:

> *See how all Nadia is shaking*
>
> *Under the waves of Gaurānga\'s love!*

And along with it these lines:

> *Behold, the two brothers have come, who weep while chanting Hari\'s
> name, The brothers who, in return for blows, offer to sinners Hari\'s
> love. . . .*

And these too:

> *Gaur and Nitai, ye blessed brothers!*
>
> *I have heard how kind you are,*
>
> *And therefore I have come to you.*

The devotees were taking the prasad. It was a sumptuous feast. Sri
Ramakrishna said to M.: \"Haven\'t you invited the Mukherjis? Ask
Surendra to feed the musicians.\"

Bepin Sarkar arrived. The devotees introduced him to the Master. Sri
Ramakrishna sat up and said to the devotees, \"Give him a seat and some
betel-leaf.\" He said to Bepin humbly: \"I am sorry not to be able to
talk to you. There is a great crowd today.\"

Pointing to Girindra, Sri Ramakrishna said to Baburam, \"Give him a
carpet.\" Nityagopal was sitting on the floor. The Master asked a
devotee to give him a carpet too.

Physician Mahendra of Sinthi arrived. The Master, smiling, asked Rākhāl
by a sign to have the physician examine his pulse.

Turning to Ramlal, the Master said, \"Be friendly with Girish Ghosh;
then you will get a free ticket to the theatre.\"

Narendra had been talking a long time with Hazra on the porch. Since his
father\'s death Narendra had been having financial worries. He entered
the room and took a seat.

**Hazra\'s eccentricities**

MASTER (to Narendra): \"Were you with Hazra? Both of you are in the same
boat. You know the saying about the two friends: \'You are away from
your country and he is away from his beloved.\' Hazra, too, needs
fifteen hundred rupees. (Laughter.)

\"Hazra says: \'Narendra has acquired one hundred per cent sattva,
though still there is in him a pink glow of rajas. But I have one
hundred and twenty-five per cent pure sattva.\' (All laugh.)

\"I say to Hazra, \'You indulge in reasoning only: that is why you are
so dry.\' He retorts, \'No, I am dry because I drink the nectar of the
sun.\'

\"Speaking of pure bhakti, I say to Hazra, \'A real devotee does not
pray to God for money or riches.\' Hazra replies: \'When the flood of
divine grace descends, the rivers overflow; and further, the pools and
canals are filled. By the grace of God one gets not only pure devotion
but also the six supernatural powers, and money too.\' \"

Narendra and many other devotees were seated on the floor. Girish
entered the room and joined them.

MASTER (to Girish): \"I look on Narendra as Ātman. I obey him.\"

GIRISH: \"Is there anyone you don\'t obey?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"He has a manly nature and I have the nature of a
woman. He is a noble soul and belongs to the realm of the Indivisible
Brahman.\"

Girish went out to have a smoke.

NARENDRA (to the Master): \"I had a talk with Girish Ghosh. He is indeed
a great man. We talked about you.\"

MASTER: \"What did you say about me?\"

NARENDRA: \"That you are illiterate and we are scholars. Oh, we talked
in that vein!\" (Laughter.)

MANI MALLICK (to the Master): \"You have become a pundit without reading
a book.\"

**Goal of scriptural study**

MASTER (to Narendra and the others): \"Let me tell you this: really and
truly I don\'t feel sorry in the least that I haven\'t read the Vedānta
or the other scriptures. I know that the essence of the Vedānta is that
Brahman alone is real and the world illusory. And what is the essence of
the Gitā ? It is what you get by repeating the word ten times. Then it
is reversed into, *\'Tagi\',* which refers to renunciation. The pupil
should hear the essence of the scriptures from the guru; then he should
practise austerity and devotions. A man needs the letter he has received
from home as long as he has not learnt its contents. After reading it,
however, he sets out to get the thing he has been asked to send.
Likewise, what need is there of the scriptures if you know their
essence? The next thing is the practice of spiritual discipline.\"

Girish entered the room.

MASTER (to Girish): \"Hello! What were you saying about me? I eat,
drink, and make merry.\"

GIRISH: \"What should we have been saying about you? Are you a holy
man?\"

MASTER: \"No, nothing of the sort. Truly I do not feel I am a holy man.

GIRISH: \"I am not your equal even in joking.\"

MASTER: \"I once went to Jaygopal Sen\'s garden house wearing a red
bordered cloth. Keshab was there.

Looking at the red borders Keshab said: \'What\'s this? Such a flash of
colour today! Such a display of red border I said, \'I have to cast a
spell on Keshab; hence this display.\' \"

Narendra was going to sing again. Sri Ramakrishna asked M. to take down
the Tānpura from the wall. Narendra was a long time tuning it. The
Master and the devotees became impatient. Binode said, \"He will tune it
today and sing another day.\" (Laughter.)

Sri Ramakrishna laughed. He said: \"I feel like breaking the Tānpura to
pieces! What is this? Only \'Tong-tong\'!

Then he will practise: \'Tana-nana -nere-num\'!\"

BHAVANĀTH: \"Everybody feels annoyed like this before a musical
performance begins.\"

NARENDRA (still tuning): \"If you don\'t understand it.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"There! He explains away our complaints!\"

Narendra began to sing. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the small couch.
Nityagopal and the other devotees were on the floor.

Narendra sang:

> *O Mother, Thou my Inner Guide, ever awake within my heart!*
>
> *Day and night Thou holdest me in Thy lap.*
>
> *Why dost Thou show such tenderness to this unworthy child of
> Thine?..*
>
> *Then he sang:*
>
> *O my lute of a single string!*
>
> *Sing the blessed Mother\'s name,*
>
> *For She is the solace of my soul. . . .*

And again:

> *In dense darkness, O Mother, Thy formless beauty sparkles; Therefore
> the yogis meditate in a dark mountain cave. . . .*

In an ecstatic mood Sri Ramakrishna came down and sat by Narendra\'s
side. He began to talk, still in ecstasy.

MASTER: \"Shall I sing? Fie! (To Nityagopal) What do you say? One should
listen to singing to awaken the inner spirit. Nothing matters
afterwards. \"He has kindled the fire. That is nice. Now all is silence.
That\'s nice too. I am silent; you be silent too. The thing is to dive
into the Elixir of Bliss.

\"Shall I sing? Well, I may. Water is water whether it is still or in
waves.\"

Narendra was seated near the Master. He was constantly worried about his
financial difficulties at home. He was now twenty-three years old. Sri
Ramakrishna looked at him intently.

MASTER (to Narendra, smiling): \"Undoubtedly you are \'Kha\'. But you
have to worry about \'taxes\'; that\'s the trouble.\" By \"taxes\" the
Master meant Narendra\'s financial difficulties at home.

MASTER: \"Krishnakishore used to say that he was \'Kha\'. One day I
visited him at his home and found him

worried. He wouldn\'t talk to me freely. I asked him: \'What\'s the
matter? Why are you brooding like this?\'

Krishna kishore said: \'The tax-collector came today. He said my pots
and pans would be sold at auction if I didn\'t pay my taxes. That\'s
what I am worrying about.\' I laughed and said: \'How is that? You are
surely \'Kha\', the Ākāśa. Let the rascals take away your pots and pans.
What is that to you?\'

**Occult powers**

(To Narendra) \"So I am saying that you are \'Kha\'. Why are you so
worried? Don\'t you know that Sri Krishna said to Arjuna, \'If you have
one of the eight siddhis, you may get a little power, but you will not
realize Me.\' By

siddhis one may acquire powers, strength, money, and such things, but
not God.

**Go beyond duality**

\"Let me tell you something else. Go beyond knowledge and ignorance.
People say that such and such a one is

1.  Jnāni; but in reality it is not so. Vasishtha was a great Jnāni, but
    even he was stricken with grief on account of the death of his sons.
    At this Lakshmana said to Rāma: \'This is amazing, Rāma. Even
    Vasishtha is so grief-stricken!\' Rāma said: \'Brother, he who has
    knowledge has ignorance as well. He who is aware of light is also
    aware of darkness. He who knows good also knows bad. He who knows
    happiness also know misery. Brother, go beyond duality, beyond
    pleasure and pain, beyond knowledge and ignorance.\' (To Narendra)
    So I am asking you to go beyond both knowledge and ignorance.\"

Sri Ramakrishna went back to his small couch. The devotees were seated
on the floor. Surendra sat by his side. The Master cast an affectionate
look on him and began to give him advice.

**Advice to Surendra**

MASTER (to Surendra): \"Come here every now and then. Nangta used to say
that a brass pot must be polished every day; otherwise it gets stained.
One should constantly live in the company of holy men.

\"The renunciation of \'woman and gold\' is for sannyāsis. It is not for
you.

Now and then you should go into solitude and call on God with a yearning
heart. Your renunciation should be mental.

\"Unless a devotee is of the heroic type he cannot pay attention to both
God and the world. King Janaka lived a householder\'s life only after
attaining perfection through austerity and prayer. He fenced with two
swords, the one of Knowledge and the other of action.\"

The Master sang:

> *This very world is a mansion of mirth;*
>
> *Here I can eat, here drink and make merry.*
>
> *Janaka\'s might was unsurpassed;*
>
> *What did he lack of the world or the Spirit?*
>
> *Holding to one as well as the other,*
>
> *He drank his milk from a brimming cup!*

**Duties of householders**

MASTER: \"For you, as Chaitanya said, the disciplines to be practised
are kindness to living beings, service to the devotees, and chanting the
name of God.

(To Surendra) \"Why do I say all this to you? You work in a merchant\'s
office. I say this to you because you have many duties to perform there.

\"You tell lies at the office. Then why do I eat the food you offer me?
Because you give your money in charity; you give away more than you
earn. \'The seed of the melon is bigger than the fruit\', as the saying
goes.

\"I cannot eat anything offered by miserly people. Their wealth is
squandered in these ways: first, litigation; second, thieves and
robbers; third, physicians; fourth, their wicked children\'s
extravagance. It is like that.

**Master praises charity**

\"Your giving money away in charity is very good. Those who have money
should give in charity. The miser\'s wealth is spirited away, but the
money of the charitable person is saved. He spends it for a righteous
purpose. At Kamarpukur I have seen the farmers cutting channels to
irrigate their fields. Sometimes the water rushes in with such force
that the ridges around the fields are washed away and the crops
destroyed. For this reason the farmers make holes here and there in the
ridges. Since the water escapes through the holes, the ridges are

not destroyed by the rush of the water. Furthermore, the escaping water
deposits soft clay in the fields, which increases their fertility and
gives a richer crop. He who gives away in charity achieves great
results. He achieves the four fruits: dharma, artha, kama, and moksha.\"

The devotees listened with great attention to Sri Ramakrishna\'s words.

SURENDRA: \"I cannot meditate well. I repeat the Divine Mother\'s name
now and then. Lying in bed, I repeat Her name and fall asleep.\"

MASTER: \"That is enough. You remember Her, don\'t you?

\"There are two kinds of yoga: Mano Yoga and Karma Yoga. To perform,
following the guru\'s instructions, such pious acts as worship,
pilgrimage, and service to living beings is called karmayoga. The duties
that Janaka performed are also called karmayoga. The meditation and
contemplation of the yogis is called manoyoga.

\"Sometimes I say to myself in the Kāli temple, \'O Mother, the mind is
nothing but Yourself.\' Therefore Pure Mind, Pure Buddhi, and Pure Ātman
are one and the same thing.\"

It was about dusk. Many of the devotees saluted Sri Ramakrishna and
started to go home. The Master went to the west porch. Bhavanāth and M.
were with him.

MASTER (to Bhavanāth): \"Why do you come here so seldom?\"

BHAVANĀTH (smiling): \"Sir, I visit you once in a fortnight. I saw you
in the street the other day, so I didn\'t come here.\"

MASTER: \"What do you mean? What can you gain by mere seeing? Touch and
talk are also necessary.\"

The evening worship had begun in the temples. It was the eighth day of
the bright fortnight of the moon; the temple domes, the courtyard, the
gardens, and the trees were shining in the moonlight. The Ganges was
flowing north with a murmuring sound. Sri Ramakrishna sat on the small
couch in his room absorbed in contemplation of the Divine Mother.

The evening worship was over. One or two devotees were still in the
temple garden. Narendra had left. Sri Ramakrishna was pacing the
verandah northeast of his room. M. stood there looking at him. Suddenly
he said to M., \"Ah, how sweet Narendra\'s music is!\"

M: \"Yes, sir. That song beginning with \'In dense darkness\' is
particularly beautiful.\"

MASTER: \"You are right. That song has a deep meaning. A part of my mind
is still drawn to it.\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Meditation in darkness is prescribed in the Tantra.\"

**Master and Girish**

Girish Ghosh came and stood by Sri Ramakrishna, who had started to sing:

> *Is Kāli, my Mother, really black?*
>
> *The Naked One, of blackest hue,*
>
> *Lights the Lotus of the Heart. . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna was filled with divine fervour. Standing with one arm
resting on Girish\'s body he sang:

> *Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas,*
>
> *So long as I can breathe my last with Kāli\'s name upon my lips?*
>
> *What need of rituals has a man, what need of devotions any more,*
>
> *If he repeats the Mother\'s name at the three holy hours?*
>
> *Rituals may pursue him close, but never can they overtake him. . . .*

Then he sang:

> *Once for all, this time, I have thoroughly understood;*
>
> *From One who knows it well, I have learnt the secret of bhava.*
>
> *A man has come to me from a country where there is no night,*
>
> *And now I cannot distinguish day from night any longer;*
>
> *Rituals and devotions have all grown profitless for me.*
>
> *My sleep is broken; how can I slumber any more?*
>
> *For now I am wide awake in the sleeplessness of yoga.*
>
> *O Divine Mother, made one with Thee in yoga-sleep at last,*
>
> *My slumber I have lulled asleep for evermore.*
>
> *I bow my head, says Prasad, before desire and liberation;*
>
> *Knowing the secret that Kāli is one with the highest Brahman,*
>
> *I have discarded, once for all, both righteousness and sin.*
>
> *As Sri Ramakrishna looked at Girish, his ecstatic fervour became more
> intense.*

He sang:

> *I have surrendered my soul at the fearless feet of the Mother;*
>
> *Am I afraid of Death any more?*
>
> *Unto the tuft of hair on my head*
>
> *Is tied the almighty mantra, Mother Kāli\'s name.*
>
> *My body I have sold in the market-place of the world*
>
> *And with it have bought Sri Durga\'s name. . .*

Intoxicated with God, Sri Ramakrishna repeated the lines:

> *My body I have sold in the market-place of the world*
>
> *And with it have bought Sri Durga\'s name.*

Looking at Girish and M. he said, \"\'Divine fervour fills my body and
robs me of consciousness.\'

\"Here \'consciousness\' means consciousness of the outer world. One
needs the Knowledge of Reality and Brahman.

**Selfless divine love**

\"Bhakti, love of God, is the only essential thing. One kind of bhakti
has a motive behind it. Again, there is a motiveless love, pure
devotion, a love of God that seeks no return. Keshab Sen and the members
of the Brahmo Samaj didn\'t know about motiveless love. In this love
there is no desire; it is nothing but pure love of the Lotus Feet of
God.

\"There is another kind of love, known as urjhitabhakti, an ecstatic
love of God that overflows, as it were. When it is awakened, the devotee
\'laughs and weeps and dances and sings\'. Chaitanyadeva is an example
of this love. Rāma said to Lakshmana, \'Brother, if anywhere you see the
manifestation of urjhita bhakti, know for certain that I am there.\'\"

GIRlSH: \"Everything is possible through your grace. What was I before?
And see what I am now.\"

MASTER: \"You had latent tendencies; so they are manifesting themselves
now. Nothing happens except at the

proper time. Take the case of a patient. Nature has almost cured him,
when the physician prescribes a herb and asks him to drink its juice.
After taking the medicine he is completely cured. Now, is the patient
cured by the medicine, or does he get well by himself? Who can tell?

\"Lakshmana said to Lava and Kusa: \'You are mere children; you don\'t
know Rāma\'s power. At the touch of His

feet, Ahalyā, who had been turned into a stone, got back her human
form.\' Lava and Kusa said: \'Revered sir, we know that. We have heard
the story. The stone became Ahalyā because of the power of the holy
man\'s words. The sage Gautama said to her: \"In the Tretayuga, Rāma
will pass this hermitage. You will become Hanuman being again at the
touch of His feet.\"\' Now, who can tell whether the miracle happened in
order that the sage\'s words should be fulfilled or on account of
Rāma\'s holiness?

\"Everything happens by the will of God. If your spiritual consciousness
has been awakened at this place, know that I am only an instrument.
\'Uncle Moon is everybody\'s uncle.\' All happens by the will of God.\"

GIRISH (smiling): \"Did you say \'by the will of God\'? What I am saying
is the very same thing.\" (All laugh.)

MASTER (to Girish): \"By being guileless one can speedily realize God.
There are several kinds of people who do not attain divine knowledge.
First, a man with a perverse mind; he is not guileless. Second, one who
is very fastidious about outer purity. Third, a doubting person.\"

Sri Ramakrishna spoke highly of Nityagopal\'s ecstasy.

Three or four devotees stood near Sri Ramakrishna on the verandah and
listened to his words about the exalted state of the paramahamsa. The
Master said: \"A Paramahamsa is always conscious that God alone is real
and all else illusory. Only the swan has the power to separate milk from
a mixture of milk and water. The swan\'s tongue secretes an acid that
separates the milk from the mixture. The paramahamsa also possesses such
a juice; it is his ecstatic love for God. That separates the Real from
the mixture of the Real and the unreal. Through it one becomes aware of
God and sees Him.\"

**Wednesday, February 25, 1885**

**Knowledge of Brahman**

Sri Ramakrishna was at the house of Girish Ghosh in Bosepara Lane,
Calcutta. It was about three o\'clock when M. arrived and prostrated
himself before him. The Master was going to see a play at the Star
Theatre. He was talking with the devotees about the Knowledge of
Brahman.

MASTER: \"Man experiences three states of consciousness: waking, dream,
and deep sleep. Those who follow the path of knowledge explain away the
three states. According to them, Brahman is beyond the three states. It
is also beyond the gross, the subtle, and the causal bodies, and beyond
the three *Gunās*-sattva, rajas, and tamas. All these are māyā, like a
reflection in a mirror. The reflection is by no means the real
substance. Brahman alone is the Substance and all else is illusory.

\"The knowers of Brahman say, further, that it is the identification of
the soul with the body that creates the notion of duality. In that state
of identification the reflection appears real. When this identification
disappears, a man realizes, \'I am He; I am Brahman.\'

**Two paths of Brahmajnana**

A DEVOTEE: \"Then shall we all follow the path of reasoning?\"

MASTER: \"Reasoning is one of the paths; it is the path of the
Vedantists. But there is another path, the path of bhakti. If a bhakta,
weeps longingly for the Knowledge of Brahman, he receives that as well.
These are the two paths: jnāna and bhakti.

**The ego of the Divine Incarnation**

*sādhanā*.

\"One may attain the Knowledge of Brahman by either path. Some retain
bhakti even after realizing Brahman, in order to teach humanity. An
Incarnation of God is one of these.

\"A man cannot easily get rid of the ego and the consciousness that the
body is the soul. It becomes possible only when, through the grace of
God, he attains samādhi-nirvikalpa samādhi, jada samādhi.

\"The ego of the Incarnations returns to them when they come down from
the plane of samādhi; but then it is the \'ego of Knowledge\' or the
\'ego of Devotion\'. Through the \'ego of Knowledge\' they teach men.
Sankaracharya kept the \'ego of Knowledge\'.

\"Through the \'ego of Devotion\' Chaitanyadeva tasted divine love and
enjoyed the company of the devotees. He talked about God and chanted His
name.

**The path of bhakti**

\"Since one cannot easily get rid of the ego, a bhakta does not explain
away the states of waking, dream, and deep sleep. He accepts all the
states. Further, he accepts the three *Gunās*-sattva, rajas, and tamas.
A bhakta sees that God alone has become the twenty-four cosmic
principles, the universe, and all living beings. He also sees that God
reveals Himself to His devotees in a tangible form, which is the
embodiment of Spirit.

\"The bhakta takes shelter under Vidyā-māyā. He seeks holy company, goes
on pilgrimage, and practises discrimination, devotion, and renunciation.
He says that, since a man cannot easily get rid of his ego, he should
let the rascal remain as the servant of God, the devotee of God.

**Meaning of liberation**

\"But a bhakta also attains the Knowledge of Oneness; he sees that
nothing exists but God. He does not regard the world as a dream, but
says that it is God Himself who has become everything. In a wax garden
you may see various objects, but everything is made of wax.

\"But a man realizes this only when his devotion to God has matured. One
gets jaundice when too much bile accumulates. Then one sees everything
as yellow. From constantly meditating on Krishna, Radhika saw everything
as Krishna; moreover, she even felt that she herself had become Krishna.
If a piece of lead is kept in a lake of mercury a long time, it turns
into mercury. The cockroach becomes motionless by constantly meditating
on the kumira worm; it loses the power to move. At last it is
transformed into a kumira. Similarly, by constantly meditating on God
the bhakta loses his ego; he realizes that God is he and he is God. When
the cockroach becomes the kumira everything is achieved. Instantly one
obtains liberation.

\"As long as God retains the ego in a man, he should establish a
definite relationship with God, calling on Him as Master, Mother,
Friend, or the like. I spent one year as a handmaid-the handmaid of the
Divine Mother, the Embodiment of Brahman. I used to dress myself as a
woman. I put on a nose-ring. One can conquer lust by assuming the
attitude of a woman.

**Master warns against lust**

\"One must worship the *Ādyāśakti*. She must be propitiated. She alone
has assumed all female forms. Therefore

I look on all women as mother. The attitude of looking on woman as
mother is very pure. The Tantra mentions the *Vamachara* method also.
But that is not a good method; it causes the aspirant\'s downfall. A
devotee

keeping an object of enjoyment near him has reason to be afraid.

\"Looking on woman as mother is like fasting on the Ekadasi day without
touching even a drop of water; in this attitude there is not the
slightest trace of sensual enjoyment. Another way of observing the
Ekadasi allows the taking of fruit and the like. One can also observe
the day by eating luchi and curries! But my attitude is not to touch
even a drop of water while I observe the fast. I worshipped the Shorasi
as my mother; I looked on all

parts of her body as those of my mother. This attitude of regarding God
as Mother is the last word in \'O God, Thou art my Mother and I am Thy
child\'-this is the last word in spirituality.

