![](vertopal_b90bfb242d7240f2ab2048109719471a/media/image1.png)

THE GOSPEL OF SRI RAMAKRISHNA

"SRI SRI RAMAKRISHNA KATHAMRITA"

By Mahendranath Gupta ("M"), His Disciple

Translated from the Bengali by Swami Nikhilananda

**Reproduced from the webpage of**

**Ramakrishna Math and Ramakrishna Mission**

[**[http://www.belurmath.org/gospel/index.htm]{.underline}**](http://www.belurmath.org/gospel/index.htm)

**FOREWORD**

by *Aldous Huxley*

IN THE HISTORY of the arts, genius is a thing of very rare occurrence.
Rarer still, however, are the competent reporters and recorders of that
genius. The world has had many hundreds of admirable poets and
philosophers; but of these hundreds only a very few have had the fortune
to attract a Boswell or an Eckermann.

When we leave the field of art for that of spiritual religion, the
scarcity of competent reporters becomes even more strongly marked. Of
the day-to-day life of the great theocentric saints and contemplatives
we know, in the great majority of cases, nothing whatever. Many, it is
true, have recorded their doctrines in writing, and a few, such as St.
Augustine, Suso and St. Teresa, have left us autobiographies of the
greatest value. But, all doctrinal writing is in some measure formal and
impersonal, while the autobiographer tends to omit what he regards as
trifling matters and suffers from the further disadvantage of being
unable to say how he strikes other people and in what way he affects
their lives. Moreover, most saints have left neither writings nor
self-portraits, and for knowledge of their lives, their characters and
their teachings, we are forced to rely upon the records made by their
disciples who, in most cases, have proved themselves singularly
incompetent as reporters and biographers. Hence the special interest
attaching to this enormously detailed account of the daily life and
conversations of Sri Ramakrishna.

\"M\", as the author modestly styles himself, was peculiarly qualified
for his task. To a reverent love for his master, to a deep and
experiential knowledge of that master\'s teaching, he added a prodigious
memory for the small happenings of each day and a happy gift for
recording them in an interesting and realistic way. Making good use of
his natural gifts and of the circumstances in which he found himself,
\"M\" produced a book unique, so far as my knowledge goes, in the
literature of hagiography. No other saint has had so able and
indefatigable a Boswell. Never have the small events of a
contemplative\'s daily life been described with such a wealth of
intimate detail. Never have the casual and unstudied utterances of a
great religious teacher been set down with so minute a fidelity. To
Western readers, it is true, this fidelity and this wealth of detail are
sometimes a trifle disconcerting; for the social, religious and
intellectual frames of reference within which Sri Ramakrishna did his
thinking and expressed his feelings were entirely Indian. But after the
first few surprises and bewilderments, we begin to find something
peculiarly stimulating and instructive about the very strangeness and,
to our eyes, the eccentricity of the man revealed to us in \"M\'s\"
narrative. What a scholastic philosopher would call the \"accidents\" of
Ramakrishna\'s life were intensely Hindu and therefore, so far as we in
the West are concerned, unfamiliar and hard to understand; its
\"essence\", however, was intensely mystical and therefore universal. To
read through these conversations in which mystical doctrine alternates
with an unfamiliar kind of humour, and where discussions of the oddest
aspects of Hindu mythology give place to the most profound and subtle
utterances about the nature of Ultimate Reality, is in itself a liberal,
education in humility, tolerance and suspense of judgment. We must be
grateful to the translator for his excellent version of a book so
curious and delightful as a biographical document, so precious, at the
same time, for what it teaches us of the life of the spirit.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**PREFACE**

by Swāmi Nikhilānanda

The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna is the English translation of the *Sri Sri
Rāmakrishna Kathāmrita,* the conversations of Sri Ramakrishna with his
disciples, devotees, and visitors, recorded by Mahendranāth Gupta, who
wrote the book under the pseudonym of \"M.\" The conversations in
Bengali fill five volumes, the first of which was published in 1897 and
the last shortly after M.\'s death in 1932. Sri Ramakrishna Math,
Madras, has published in two volumes an English translation of selected
chapters from the monumental Bengali work. I have consulted these while
preparing my translation.

M., one of the intimate disciples of Sri Ramakrishna, was present during
all the conversations recorded in the main body of the book and noted
them down in his diary. They therefore have the value of almost
stenographic records. In Appendix A are given several conversations
which took place in the absence of M., but of which he received a
first-hand record from persons concerned. The conversations will bring
before the reader\'s mind an intimate picture of the Master\'s eventful
life from March 1882 to April 24, 1886, only a few months before his
passing away. During this period he came in contact chiefly with
English-educated Bengālis; from among them he selected his disciples and
the bearers of his message, and with them he shared his rich spiritual
experiences.

I have made a literal translation, omitting only a few pages of no
particular interest to English-speaking readers. Often literary grace
has been sacrificed for the sake of literal translation. No translation
can do full justice to the original. This difficulty is all the more
felt in the present work, whose contents are of a deep mystical nature
and describe the inner experiences of a great seer. Human language is an
altogether inadequate vehicle to express supersensuous perception. Sri
Ramakrishna was almost illiterate. He never clothed his thoughts in
formal language. His words sought to convey his direct realization of
Truth. His conversation was in a village patois. Therein lies its charm.
In order to explain to his listeners an abstruse philosophy, he, like
Christ before him, used with telling effect homely parables and
illustrations, culled from his observation of the daily life around him.

The reader will find mentioned in this work many visions and experiences
that fall outside the ken of physical science and even psychology. With
the development of modern knowledge the border line between the natural
and the supernatural is ever shifting its position. Genuine mystical
experiences are not as suspect now as they were half a century ago. The
words of Sri Ramakrishna have already exerted a tremendous influence in
the land of his birth. Savants of Europe have found in his words the
ring of universal truth.

But these words were not the product of intellectual cogitation; they
were rooted in direct experience. Hence, to students of religion,
psychology, and physical science, these experiences of the Master are of
immense value for the understanding of religious phenomena in general.
No doubt Sri Ramakrishna was a Hindu of the Hindus; yet his experiences
transcended the limits of the dogmas and creeds of Hinduism. Mystics of
religions other than Hinduism will find in Sri Ramakrishna\'s
experiences a corroboration of the experiences of their own prophets and
seers. And this is very important today for the resuscitation of
religious values. The sceptical reader may pass by the supernatural
experiences; he will yet find in the book enough material to provoke his
serious thought and solve many of his spiritual problems.

There are repetitions of teachings and parables in the book. I have kept
them purposely. They have their charm and usefulness, repeated as they
were in different settings. Repetition is unavoidable in a work of this
kind. In the first place, different seekers come to a religious teacher
with questions of more or less identical nature; hence the answers will
be of more or less identical pattern. Besides, religious teachers of all
times and climes have tried, by means of repetition, to hammer truths
into the stony soil of the recalcitrant human mind. Finally, repetition
does not seem tedious if the ideas repeated are dear to a man\'s heart.

I have thought it necessary to write a rather lengthy Introduction to
the book. In it I have given the

biography of the Master, descriptions of people who came in contact with
him, short explanations of several systems of Indian religious thought
intimately connected with Sri Ramakrishna\'s life, and other relevant
matters which, I hope, will enable the reader better to understand and
appreciate the unusual contents of this book. It is particularly
important that the Western reader, unacquainted with Hindu religious
thought, should first read carefully the introductory chapter, in order
that he may fully enjoy these conversations. Many Indian terms and names
have been retained in the book for want of suitable English equivalents.
Their meaning is given either in the Glossary or in the foot-notes. The
Glossary also gives explanations of a number of expressions unfamiliar
to Western readers. The diacritical marks are explained under Notes on
Pronunciation.

In the Introduction I have drawn much material from the Life of Sri
Ramakrishna, published by the Advaita Ashrama, Māyāvati, India. I have
also consulted the excellent article on Sri Ramakrishna by Swami
Nirvedānanda, in the second volume of the Cultural Heritage of India.

The book contains many songs sung either by the Master or by the
devotees. These form an important feature of the spiritual tradition of
Bengal and were for the most part written by men of mystical experience.
For giving the songs their present form I am grateful to Mr. John
Moffitt, Jr.

In the preparation of this manuscript I have received ungrudging help
from several friends. Miss Margaret Woodrow Wilson and Mr.Joseph
Campbell have worked hard in editing my translation. Mrs.Elizabeth
Davidson has typed, more than once, the entire manuscript and rendered
other valuable help. Mr.Aldous Huxley has laid me under a debt of
gratitude by writing the Foreword. I sincerely thank them all.

In the spiritual firmament Sri Ramakrishna is a waxing crescent. Within
one hundred years of his birth and fifty years of his death his message
has spread across land and sea. Romain Rolland has described him as the
fulfilment of the spiritual aspirations of the three hundred millions of
Hindus for the last two thousand years. Mahatma Gandhi has written:
\"His life enables us to see God face to face. . . . Ramakrishna was a
living embodiment of godliness.\" He is being recognized as a compeer of
Krishna, Buddha, and Christ.

The life and teachings of Sri Ramakrishna have redirected the thoughts
of the denationalized Hindus to the spiritual ideals of their
forefathers. During the latter part of the nineteenth century his was
the time-honoured role of the Saviour of the Eternal Religion of the
Hindus. His teachings played an important part in liberalizing the minds
of orthodox pundits and hermits. Even now he is the silent force that is
moulding the spiritual destiny of India. His great disciple, Swami
Vivekananda, was the first Hindu missionary to preach the message of
Indian culture to the enlightened minds of Europe and America. The full
consequence of Swami Vivekānandā work is still in the womb of the
future.

May this translation of the first book of its kind in the religious
history of the world, being the record of the direct words of a prophet,
help stricken humanity to come nearer to the Eternal Verity of life and
remove dissension and quarrel from among the different faiths! May it
enable seekers of Truth to grasp the subtle laws of the supersensuous
realm, and unfold before man\'s restricted vision the spiritual
foundation of the universe, the unity of existence, and the divinity of
the soul!

> *- Sw*ā*mi Nikhilānanda*

*New York*

*Sri Ramakrishna\'s Birthday*

*February 1942*

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

*The Recorder of the Gospel*

**MAHENDRANĀTH GUPTA**

In the life of the great Saviours and Prophets of the world it is often
found that they are accompanied by souls of high spiritual potency who
play a conspicuous part in the furtherance of their Master\'s mission.
They become so integral a part of the life and work of these great ones
that posterity can think of them only in mutual association. Such is the
case with Sri Ramakrishna and M., whose diary has come to be known to
the world as

the *Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna* in English and as *Sri Rāmakrishna
Kathāmrita* in the original Bengali

version.

Sri Mahendra Nath Gupta, familiary known to the readers of the Gospel by
his pen name M., and to the devotees as Master Mahashay, was born on the
14th of July, 1854 as the son of Madhusudan Gupta, an officer of the
Calcutta High Court, and his wife, Swarnamayi Devi. He had a brilliant
scholastic career at Hare School and the Presidency College at Calcutta.
The range of his studies included the best that both occidental and
oriental learning had to offer. English literature, history, economics,
western philosophy and law on the one hand, and Sanskrit literature and
grammar, Darsanas, Puranas, Smritis, Jainism, Buddhism, astrology and
Ayurveda on the other were the subjects in which he attained
considerable proficiency.

He was an educationist all his life both in a spiritual and in a secular
sense. After he passed out of College, he took up work as headmaster in
a number of schools in succession Narail High School, City School, Ripon
College School, Metropolitan School, Aryan School, Oriental School,
Oriental Seminary and Model School. The causes of his migration from
school to school were that he could not get on with some of the
managements on grounds of principles and that often his spiritual mood
drew him away to places of pilgrimage for long periods. He worked with
some of the most noted public men of the time like Iswar Chandra
Vidyāsāgar and Surendranath Banerjee. The latter appointed him as a
professor in the City and Ripon Colleges where he taught subjects like
English, philosophy, history and economics. In his later days he took
over the Morton School, and he spent his time in the staircase room of
the third floor of it, administering the school and preaching the
message of the Master. He was much respected in educational circles
where he was usually referred to as Rector Mahashay. A teacher who had
worked under him writes thus in warm appreciation of his teaching
methods: \"Only when I worked with him in school could I appreciate what
a great educationist he was. He would come down to the level of his
students when teaching, though he himself was so learned, so talented.
Ordinarily teachers confine their instruction to what is given in books
without much thought as to whether the student can accept it or not. But
M., would first of all gauge how much the student could take in and by
what means. He would employ aids to teaching like maps, pictures and
diagrams, so that his students could learn by seeing. Thirty years ago
(from 1953) when the question of imparting education through the medium
of the mother tongue was being discussed, M. had already employed
Bengali as the medium of instruction in the Morton School.\" (M *The
Apostle and the Evangelist* by Swami Nityatmananda Part I. P. 15.)

Imparting secular education was, however, only his profession ; his main
concern was with the spiritual regeneration of man a calling for which
Destiny seems to have chosen him. From his childhood he was deeply
pious, and he used to be moved very much by Sādhus, temples and Durga
Puja celebrations. The piety and eloquence of the great Brahmo leader of
the times, Keshab Chander Sen, elicited a powerful response from the
impressionable mind of Mahendra Nath, as it did in the case of many an
idealistic young man of Calcutta, and prepared him to receive the great
Light that was to dawn on him with the coming of Sri Ramakrishna into
his life.

This epoch-making event of his life came about in a very strange way. M.
belonged to a joint family with several collateral members. Some ten
years after he began his career as an educationist, bitter quarrels
broke out among the members of the family, driving the sensitive M. to
despair and utter despondency. He lost all interest in life and left
home one night to go into the wide world with the idea of ending his
life. At dead of night he took rest in his sister\'s house at Baranagar,
and in the morning, accompanied by a nephew

Siddheswar, he wandered from one garden to another in Calcutta until
Siddheswar brought him to the Temple Garden of Dakshineswar where Sri
Ramakrishna was then living. After spending some time in the beautiful
rose gardens there, he was directed to the room of the Paramahamsa,
where the eventful meeting of the Master and the disciple took place on
a blessed evening (the exact date is not on record) on a Sunday in March
1882. As regards what took place on the occasion, the reader is referred
to the opening section of the first chapter of

the *Gospel*.

The Master, who divined the mood of desperation in M, his resolve to
take leave of this \'play-field of deception\', put new faith and hope
into him by his gracious words of assurance: \"God forbid! Why should
you take leave of this world? Do you not feel blessed by discovering
your Guru? By His grace, what is beyond all imagination or dreams can be
easily achieved!\" At these words the clouds of despair moved away from
the horizon of M.\'s mind, and the sunshine of a new hope revealed to
him fresh vistas of meaning in life. Referring to this phase of his
life, M. used to say, \"Behold! where is the resolve to end life, and
where, the discovery of God! That is, sorrow should be looked upon as a
friend of man. God is all good.\" (*Ibid* P.33.)

After this re-settlement, M\'s life revolved around the Master, though
he continued his professional work as an educationist. During all
holidays, including Sundays, he spent his time at Dakshineswar in the
Master\'s company, and at times extended his stay to several days.

It did not take much time for M. to become very intimate with the
Master, or for the Master to recognise in this disciple a divinely
commissioned partner in the fulfilment of his spiritual mission. When M.
was reading out the Chaitanya Bhagavata, the Master discovered that he
had been, in a previous birth, a disciple and companion of the great
Vaishnava Teacher, Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, and the Master even saw him
\'with his naked eye\' participating in the ecstatic mass-singing of the
Lord\'s name under the leadership of that Divine personality. So the
Master told M, \"You are my own, of the same substance as the father and
the son,\" indicating thereby that M. was one of the chosen few and a
part and parcel of his Divine mission.

There was an urge in M. to abandon the household life and become a
Sannyāsin. When he communicated this idea to the Master, he forbade him
saying,\" Mother has told me that you have to do a little of Her work
you will have to teach Bhagavata, the word of God to humanity. The
Mother keeps a Bhagavata Pandit with a bondage in the world!\" (*Ibid*
P.36.)

An appropriate allusion indeed! Bhagavata, the great scripture that has
given the word of Sri Krishna to mankind, was composed by the Sage Vyāsa
under similar circumstances. When caught up in a mood of depression like
that of M, Vyāsa was advised by the sage Nārada that he would gain peace
of mind only qn composing a work exclusively devoted to the depiction of
the Lord\'s glorious attributes and His teachings on Knowledge and
Devotion, and the result was that the world got from Vyāsa the
invaluable gift of the

Bhagavata Purana depicting the life and teachings of Sri Krishna. From
the mental depression of the modem Vyāsa, the world has obtained the
*Kathāmrita* (Bengali Edition) the *Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna* in
English.

Sri Ramakrishna was a teacher for both the Orders of mankind, Sannyāsins
and householders. His own life offered an ideal example for both, and he
left behind disciples who followed the highest traditions he had set in
respect of both these ways of life. M., along with Nag Mahashay,
exemplified how a householder can rise to the highest level of sagehood.
M. was married to Nikunja Devi, a distant relative of Keshab Chander
Sen, even when he was reading at College, and he had four children, two
sons and two daughters. The responsibility of the family, no doubt, made
him dependent on his professional income, but the great devotee that he
was, he never compromised with ideals and principles for this reason.
Once when he was working as the headmaster in

1.  school managed by the great Vidyāsāgar, the results of the school at
    the public examination happened to be rather poor, and Vidyāsāgar
    attributed it to M\'s pre-occupation with the Master and his
    consequent failure to attend adequately to the school work. M. at
    once resigned his post without any thought of the morrow. Within a
    fortnight the family was in poverty, and M. was one day pacing up
    and down the verandah of his house,

    Nityatmananda vol. I. P. 40.)

musing how he would feed his children the next day. Just then a man came
with a letter addressed to \'Mahendra Babu\', and on opening it, M.
found that it was a letter from his friend Sri Surendra Nath Banerjee,
asking whether he would like to take up a professorship in the Ripon
College. In this way three or four times he gave up the job that gave
him the wherewithal to support the family, either for upholding
principles or for practising spiritual Sadhanas in holy places, without
any consideration of the possible dire worldly consequences; but he was
always able to get over these difficulties somehow, and the interests of
his family never suffered. In spite of his disregard for worldly goods,
he was, towards the latter part of his life, in a fairly flourishing
condition as the proprietor of the Morton School which he developed into
a noted educational institution in the city. The Lord has said in the
Bhagavad Gitā that in the case of those who think of nothing except Him,
He Himself would take up all their material and spiritual
responsibilities. M. was an example of the truth of the Lord\'s promise.

Though his children received proper attention from him, his real family,
both during the Master\'s life-time and after, consisted of saints,
devotees, Sannyāsins and spiritual aspirants. His life exemplifies the
Master\'s teaching that an ideal householder must be like a good
maid-servant of a family, loving and caring properly for the children of
the house, but knowing always that her real home and children are
elsewhere. During the Master\'s life-time he spent all his Sundays and
other holidays with him and his devotees, and besides listening to the
holy talks and devotional music, practised meditation both on the
Personal and the Impersonal aspects of God under the direct guidance of
the Master. In the pages of the Gospel the reader gets a picture of
M.\'s spiritual relationship with the Master how from a hazy belief in
the Impersonal God of the Brahmos, he was step by step brought to accept
both Personality and Impersonality as the two aspects of the same
Non-dual Being, how he was convinced of the manifestation of that Being
as Gods, Goddesses and as Incarnations, and how he was established in a
life that was both of a Jnāni and of a Bhakta. This Jnāni-Bhakta outlook
and way of living became so dominant a feature of his life that Swami
Raghavananda, who was very closely associated with him during his last
six years, remarks: \"Among those who lived with M. in latter days, some
felt that he always lived in this constant and conscious union with God
even with open eyes (i.e., even in waking

consciousness).\" (Swami Raghavananda\'s article on M. in *Prabuddha
Bharata* vol. XXXVII. P. 442.)

Besides undergoing spiritual disciplines at the feet of the Master, M.
used to go to holy places during the Master\'s life-time itself and
afterwards too as a part of his *Sādhanā*. He was one of the earliest of
the

disciples to visit Kamarpukur, the birthplace of the Master, in the
latter\'s life-time itself; for he wished to practise contemplation on
the Master\'s early life in its true original setting. His experience
there is described as follows by Swami Nityatmananda: \"By the grace of
the Master, he saw the entire Kamarpukur as a holy place bathed in an
effulgent Light. Trees and creepers, beasts and birds and men all were
made of effulgence. So he

prostrated to all on the road. He saw a torn cat, which appeared to him
luminous with the Light of Consciousness. Immediately he fell to the
ground and saluted it\" (M *The Apostle and the Evangelist* by Swami

He had similar experience in Dakshineswar also. At the instance of the
Master he also visited Puri, and in the words of Swami Nityatmananda,
\"with indomitable courage, M. embraced the image of Jagannath out of
season.\"

The life of *Sādhanā* and holy association that he started on at the
feet of the Master, he continued all through his life. He has for this
reason been most appropriately described as a Grihastha-Sannyāsi
(householder-Sannyāsin). Though he was forbidden by the Master to become
a Sannyāsin, his reverence for the Sannyāsa ideal was whole-hearted and
was without any reservation. So after Sri Ramakrishna\'s passing away,
while several of the Master\'s householder devotees considered the young
Sannyāsin disciples of the Master as inexperienced and inconsequential,
M. stood by them with the firm faith that the Master\'s life and message
were going to be perpetuated only through them. Swami Vivekananda wrote
from America in a letter to the inmates of the Math: \"When Sri Thākur
(Master) left the body, every one gave us up as a few unripe urchins.
But M. and a few others did not leave us in the lurch. We cannot repay
our debt to them.\" (Swami

Raghavananda\'s article on M. in *Prabuddha Bharata* vol. XXX P. 442.)

M. spent his weekends and holidays with the monastic brethren who, after
the Master\'s demise, had formed themselves into an Order with a Math at
Baranagore, and participated in the intense life of devotion and
meditation that they followed. At other times he would retire to
Dakshineswar or some garden in the city and spend several days in
spiritual practice taking simple self-cooked food. In order to feel that
he was one with all mankind he often used to go out of his home at dead
of night, and like a wandering Sannyāsin, sleep with the waifs on some
open verandah or footpath on the road.

After the Master\'s demise, M. went on pilgrimage several times. He
visited Banāras, Vrindāvan, Ayodhyā and other places. At Banāras he
visited the famous Trailinga Swāmi and fed him with sweets, and he had
long conversations with Swami Bhaskarananda, one of the noted saintly
and scholarly Sannyāsins of the time. In 1912 he went with the Holy
Mother to Banāras, and spent about a year in the company of Sannyāsins
at Banāras, Vrindāvan, Hardwar, Hrishikesh and Swargashram. But he
returned to Calcutta, as that city offered him the unique opportunity of
associating himself with the places hallowed by the Master in his
life-time. Afterwards he does not seem to have gone to any far-off
place, but stayed on in his room in the Morton School carrying on his
spiritual ministry, speaking on the Master and his teachings to the
large number of people who flocked to him after having read his famous
*Kathāmrita* known to English readers as *The Gospel of Sri
Ramakrishna*.

This brings us to the circumstances that led to the writing and
publication of this monumental work, which has made M. one of the
immortals in hagiographic literature. While many educated people heard
Sri Ramakrishna\'s talks, it was given to this illustrious personage
alone to leave a graphic and exact account of them for posterity, with
details like date, hour, place, names and particulars about
participants. Humanity owes this great book to the ingrained habit of
diary-keeping with which M. was endowed. Even as a boy of about
thirteen, while he was a student in the 3rd class of the Hare School, he
was in the habit of keeping a diary. \"Today on rising,\" he wrote in
his diary, \"I greeted my father and mother, prostrating on the ground
before

them\" (Swami Nityatmananda\'s \'M The Apostle and the Evangelist\' Part
I. P 29.) At another place he wrote, \"Today, while on my way to school,
I visited, as usual, the temples of Kāli, the Mother at Tharitharia, and
of Mother Sitala, and paid my obeisance to them.\" About twenty-five
years after, when he met the Great Master in the spring of 1882, it was
the same instinct of a born diary-writer that made him begin his book,
\'unique in the literature of hagiography\', with the memorable words:
\"When hearing the name of Hari or Rāma once, you shed tears and your
hair stands on end, then you may know for certain that you do not have
to perform devotions such as Sandhya any more.\"

In addition to this instinct for diary-keeping, M. had great endowments
contributing to success in this line. Writes Swami Nityatmananda who
lived in close association with M., in his book entitled *M - The
Apostle and Evangelist*: \"M.\'s prodigious memory combined with his
extraordinary power of imagination completely

annihilated the distance of time and place for him. Even after the lapse
of half a century he could always visualise vividly, scenes from the
life of Sri Ramakrishna. Superb too was his power to portray pictures by
words.\"

Besides the prompting of his inherent instinct, the main inducement for
M. to keep this diary of his experiences at Dakshineswar was his desire
to provide himself with a means for living in holy company at all times.
Being a school teacher, he could be with the Master only on Sundays and
other holidays, and it was on his diary that he depended for \'holy
company\' on other days. The devotional scriptures like the Bhagavata
say that holy company is the first and most important means for the
generation and growth of devotion. For, in such company man could hear
talks on spiritual matters and listen to the glorification of Divine
attributes, charged with the fervour and conviction emanating from the
hearts of great lovers of God. Such company is therefore the one certain
means through which Sraddha (Faith), Rati (attachment to God) and Bhakti
(loving devotion) are generated. The diary of his visits to Dakshineswar
provided M. with material for re-living, through reading and
contemplation, the holy company he had had earlier, even on days when he
was not able to visit Dakshineswar. The wealth of details and the vivid
description of men and things in the midst of which the

sublime conversations are set, provide excellent material to re-live
those experiences for any one with imaginative powers. It was observed
by M.\'s disciples and admirers that in later life also whenever he was
free or alone, he would be pouring over his diary, transporting himself
on the wings of imagination to the glorious days he spent at the feet of
the Master.

During the Master\'s life-time M. does not seem to have revealed the
contents of his diary to any one. There is an unconfirmed tradition that
when the Master saw him taking notes, he expressed apprehension at the
possibility of his utilising these to publicise him like Keshab Sen; for
the Great Master was so full of the spirit of renunciation and humility
that he disliked being lionised. It must be for this reason that no one
knew about this precious diary of M. for a decade until he brought out
selections from it as a pamphlet in English in 1897

with the Holy Mother\'s blessings and permission. The Holy Mother, being
very much pleased to hear parts of the diary read to her in Bengali,
wrote to M.: \"When I heard the *Kathāmrita*, (Bengali name of the book)
I felt as if it was he, the Master, who was saying all that.\" (*Ibid*
Part I. P 37.)

The two pamphlets in English entitled the *Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna*
appeared in October and November 1897. They drew the spontaneous
acclamation of Swami Vivekananda, who wrote on 24th November of that
year from Dehra Dun to M.:\"Many many thanks for your second leaflet. It
is indeed wonderful. The move is quite original, and never was the life
of a Great Teacher brought before the public untarnished by the
writer\'s mind, as you are doing. The language also is beyond all
praise, so fresh, so pointed, and withal so plain and easy. I cannot
express in adequate terms how I have enjoyed them. I am really in a
transport when I read them. Strange, isn\'t it? Our Teacher and Lord was
so original, and each one of us will have to be original or nothing. I
now understand why none of us attempted His life before. It has been
reserved for you, this great

work. He is with you evidently.\" (*Vedānta Kesari* Vol. XIX P. 141.
Also given in the first edition of the *Gospel* published from
Ramakrishna Math, Madras in 1911.)

And Swamiji added a post script to the letter: \"Socratic dialogues are
Plato all over you are entirely hidden. Moreover, the dramatic part is
infinitely beautiful. Everybody likes it here or in the West.\" Indeed,
in order to be unknown, Mahendranath had used the pen-name M., under
which the book has been appearing till now. But so great a book cannot
remain obscure for long, nor can its author remain unrecognised by the
large public in these modern times. M. and his book came to be widely
known very soon and to meet the growing demand, a full-sized book, Vol.
I of the *Gospel*, translated by the author himself, was published in
1907 by the Brahmavadin Office, Madras. A second edition of it, revised
by the author, was brought out by the

Ramakrishna Math, Madras in December 1911, and subsequently a second
part, containing new chapters from the original Bengali, was published
by the same Math in 1922. The full English translation of the *Gospel*
by

Swami Nikhilananda appeared first in 1942.

In Bengali the book is published in five volumes, the first part having
appeared in 1902 and the others in 1905, 1907, 1910 and 1932
respectively.

It looks as if M. was brought to the world by the Great Master to record
his words and transmit them to posterity. Swami Sivananda, a direct
disciple of the Master and the second President of the Ramakrishna Math
and Mission, says on this topic: \"Whenever there was an interesting
talk, the Master would call Master Mahashay if he was not in the room,
and then draw his attention to the holy words spoken. We did not know
then why the Master did so. Now we can realise that this action of the
Master had an important significance,

for it was reserved for Master Mahashay to give to the world at large
the sayings of the Master.\" (*Vedānta Kesari* Vol. XIX P 141.) Thanks
to M., we get, unlike in the case of the great teachers of the past, a
faithful record with date, time, exact report of conversations,
description of concerned men and places, references to contemporary
events and personalities and a hundred other details for the last four
years of the Master\'s life (1882-\'86), so that no one can doubt the
historicity of the Master and his teachings at any time in the future.

M. was, in every respect, a true missionary of Sri Ramakrishna right
from his first acquaintance with him in

1882\. As a school teacher, it was a practice with him to direct to the
Master such of his students as had a true spiritual disposition. Though
himself prohibited by the Master to take to monastic life, he encouraged
all spiritually inclined young men he came across in his later life to
join the monastic Order. Swami Vijnanananda, a direct Sannyāsin disciple
of the Master and a President of the Ramakrishna Order, once remarked to
M.: \"By enquiry, I have come to the conclusion that eighty percent and
more of the Sannyāsins have embraced the monastic life after reading the
*Kathāmrita* (Bengali name of the book) and coming in contact with
you.\" (*M The Apostle and the Evangelist* by Swami Nityatmananda Part
I, P 37.)

In 1905 he retired from the active life of a Professor and devoted his
remaining twenty-seven years exclusively to the preaching of the life
and message of the Great Master. He bought the Morton Institution from
its original proprietors and shifted it to a commodious four-storeyed
house at 50 Amherst Street, where it flourished under his management as
one of the most efficient educational institutions in Calcutta. He
generally occupied a staircase room at the top of it, cooking his own
meal which consisted only of milk and rice without variation, and
attended to all his personal needs himself. His dress also was the
simplest possible. It was his conviction that limitation of personal
wants to the minimum is an important aid to holy living. About one hour
in the morning he would spend in inspecting the classes of the school,
and then retire to his staircase room to pour over his diary and live in
the divine atmosphere of the earthly days of the Great Master, unless
devotees and admirers had already gathered in his room seeking his holy
company.

In appearance, M. looked a Vedic Rishi. Tall and stately in bearing, he
had a strong and well-built body, an unusually broad chest, high
forehead and arms extending to the knees. His complexion was fair and
his prominent eyes were always tinged with the expression of the divine
love that filled his heart. Adorned with a silvery beard that flowed
luxuriantly down his chest, and a shining face radiating the serenity
and gravity of holiness, M. was as imposing and majestic as he was
handsome and engaging in appearance. Humorous, sweet-tongued and
eloquent when situations required, this great Maharishi of our age lived
only to sing the glory of Sri Ramakrishna day and night. Though a very
well versed scholar in the Upanishads, Gitā and the philosophies of the
East and the West, all his discussions and teachings found their
culmination in the life and the message of Sri Ramakrishna, in which he
found the real explanation and illustration of all the scriptures. Both
consciously and unconsciously, he was the teacher of the *Kathāmrita*
the nectarine words of the Great Master.

Though a much-sought-after spiritual guide, an educationist of repute,
and a contemporary and close associate of illustrious personages like
Sri Ramakrishna, Swami Vivekananda, Keshab Chander Sen and Iswar Chander
Vidyāsāgar, he was always moved by the noble humanity of a lover of God,
which consists in respecting the personalities of all as receptacles of
the Divine Spirit. So he taught without the consciousness of a teacher,
and no bar of superiority stood in the way of his doing the humblest
service to his students and devotees. \"He was a commission of love,\"
writes his close devotee, Swami Raghavananda, \"and yet his soft and
sweet words would pierce the stoniest heart, make the worldly-minded
weep and repent and turn Godwards.\" (*Prabuddha Bharata* Vol. XXXVII P
499.)

As time went on and the number of devotees increased, the staircase room
and terrace of the 3rd floor of the Morton Institution became a
veritable Naimisaranya of modern times, resounding during all hours of
the day, and sometimes of night, too, with the word of God coming from
the Rishi-like face of M. addressed to the eager God-seekers sitting
around. To the devotees who helped him in preparing the text of the
*Gospel*, he would dictate the conversations of the Master in a
meditative mood, referring now and then to his diary. At

times in the stillness of midnight he would awaken a nearby devotee and
tell him: \"Let us listen to the words of the Master in the depths of
the night as he explains the truth of the Pranava.\" (*Vedānta Kesari*
XIX P. 142.)

Swami Raghavananda, an intimate devotee of M., writes as follows about
these devotional sittings: \"In the sweet and warm months of April and
May, sitting under the canopy of heaven on the roof-garden of 50 Amherst
Street, surrounded by shrubs and plants, himself sitting in their midst
like a Rishi of old, the stars and planets in their courses beckoning us
to things infinite and sublime, he would speak to us of the mysteries of
God and His love and of the yearning that would rise in the human heart
to solve the Eternal Riddle, as

\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

*\'Gurudeva-Ma, Kole tule na-o*

exemplified in the life of his Master. The mind, melting under the
influence of his soft sweet words of light, would almost transcend the
frontiers of limited existence and dare to peep into the infinite. He
himself would take the influence of the setting and say,\'What a blessed
privilege it is to sit in such a setting (pointing to the starry
heavens), in the company of the devotees discoursing on God and His
love!\' These unforgettable scenes will long remain imprinted on the
minds of his hearers.\" (Prabuddha Bharata Vol XXXVII P 497.)

About twenty-seven years of his life he spent in this way in the heart
of the great city of Calcutta, radiating

the Master\'s thoughts and ideals to countless devotees who flocked to
him, and to still larger numbers who read his *Kathāmrita* (English
Edition : *The Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna)*, the last part of which he
had

completed before June 1932 and given to the press. And miraculously, as
it were, his end also came immediately after he had completed his
life\'s mission. About three months earlier he had come to stay at his
home at 13/2 Gurdasprasad Chaudhuary Lane at Thakur Bari, where the Holy
Mother had herself installed the

Master and where His regular worship was being conducted for the
previous 40 years. The night of 3rd June being the *Phalahārini Kāli
Pooja* day, M. had sent his devotees who used to keep company with him,
to

attend the special worship at Belur Math at night. After attending the
service at the home shrine, he went through the proof of the
*Kathāmrita* for an hour. Suddenly he got a severe attack of neuralgic
pain, from

which he had been suffering now and then, of late. Before 6 a.m. in the
early hours of **4th June 1932** he

passed away, fully conscious and chanting: (Take me in your arms! O

Master! O Mother!!)\'

> *SWĀMI TAPASYĀNANDA*

*Sri Ramakrishna Math, Madras*

*March 1974.*

**INTRODUCTION**

*by Swāmi Nikhilānanda*

Sri Ramakrishna, the God-man of modern India, was born at Kāmārpukur.
This village in the Hooghly District preserved during the last century
the idyllic simplicity of the rural areas of Bengāl. Situated far from
the railway, it was untouched by the glamour of the city. It contained
rice-fields, tall palms, royal banyans, a few lakes, and two cremation
grounds. South of the village a stream took its leisurely course. A
mango orchard dedicated by a neighbouring zamindār to the public use was
frequented by the boys for their noonday sports. A highway passed
through the village to the great temple of Jagannāth at Puri, and the
villagers, most of whom were farmers and craftsmen, entertained many
passing holy men and pilgrims. The dull round of the rural life was
broken by lively festivals, the observance of sacred days, religious
singing, and other innocent pleasures.

About his parents Sri Ramakrishna once said: \"My mother was the
personification of rectitude and gentleness. She did not know much about
the ways of the world; innocent of the art of concealment, she would say
what was in her mind. People loved her for open-heartedness. My father,
an orthodox brāhmin, never accepted gifts from the Śudrās. He spent much
of his time in worship and meditation, and in repeating God\'s name and
chanting His glories. Whenever in his daily prayers he invoked the
Goddess Gāyatri, his chest flushed and tears rolled down his cheeks. He
spent his leisure hours making garlands for the Family Deity,
Raghuvir.\"

Khudirām Chattopādhyāya and Chandra Devi, the parents of Sri
Ramakrishna, were married in 1799. At that time Khudirām was living in
his ancestral village of Derepore, not far from Kāmārpukur. Their first
son, Rāmkumār, was born in 1805, and their first daughter, Kātyāyani, in
1810. In 1814 Khudirām was ordered by his landlord to bear false witness
in court against a neighbour. When he refused to do so, the landlord
brought a false case against him and deprived him of his ancestral
property. Thus dispossessed, he arrived, at the invitation of another
landlord, in the quiet village of Kāmārpukur, where he was given a
dwelling and about an acre of fertile land. The crops from this little
property were enough to meet his family\'s simple needs. Here he lived
in simplicity, dignity, and contentment.

Ten years after his coming to Kāmārpukur, Khudirām made a pilgrimage on
foot to Rāmeswar, at the southern extremity of India. Two years later
was born his second son, whom he named Rāmeśwar. Again in 1835, at the
age of sixty, he made a pilgrimage, this time to Gayā. Here, from
ancient times, Hindus have come from the four corners of India to
discharge their duties to their departed ancestors by offering them food
and drink at the sacred footprint of the Lord Vishnu. At this holy place
Khudirām had a dream in which the Lord Vishnu promised to be born as his
son. And Chandrā Devi, too, in front of the Śiva temple at Kāmārpukur,
had a vision indicating the birth of a divine child. Upon his return the
husband found that she had conceived.

It was on February 18, 1836, that the child, to be known afterwards as
Ramakrishna, was born. In memory of the dream at Gayā he was given the
name of Gadādhar, the \"Bearer of the Mace\", an epithet of Vishnu.
Three years later a little sister was born.

**Boyhood**

Gadādhar grew up into a healthy and restless boy, full of fun and sweet
mischief. He was intelligent and precocious and endowed with a
prodigious memory. On his father\'s lap he learnt by heart the names of
his ancestors and the hymns to the gods and goddesses, and at the
village school he was taught to read and write. But his greatest delight
was to listen to recitations of stories from Hindu mythology and the
epics. These he would afterwards recount from memory, to the great joy
of the villagers. Painting he enjoyed; the art of moulding images of the
gods and goddesses he learnt from the potters. But arithmetic was his
great aversion.

At the age of six or seven Gadādhar had his first experience of
spiritual ecstasy. One day in June or July, when he was walking along a
narrow path between paddy-fields, eating the puffed rice that he carried
in a basket, he looked up at the sky and saw a beautiful, dark
thunder-cloud. As it spread, rapidly enveloping the whole

sky, a flight of snow-white cranes passed in front of it. The beauty of
the contrast overwhelmed the boy. He fell to the ground, unconscious,
and the puffed rice went in all directions. Some villagers found him and
carried him home in their arms. Gadādhar said later that in that state
he had experienced an indescribable joy.

Gadādhar was seven years old when his father died. This incident
profoundly affected him. For the first time the boy realized that life
on earth was impermanent. Unobserved by others, he began to slip into
the mango orchard or into one of the cremation grounds, and he spent
hours absorbed in his own thoughts. He also became more helpful to his
mother in the discharge of her household duties. He gave more attention
to reading and hearing the religious stories recorded in the Purānās.
And he became interested in the wandering monks and pious pilgrims who
would stop at Kāmārpukur on their way to Puri. These holy men, the
custodians of India\'s spiritual heritage and the living witnesses of
the ideal of renunciation of the world and all-absorbing love of God,
entertained the little boy with stories from the Hindu epics, stories of
saints and prophets, and also stories of their own adventures. He, on
his part, fetched their water and fuel and served them in various ways.
Meanwhile, he was observing their meditation and worship.

At the age of nine, Gadādhar was invested with the *Sacred Thread.* This
ceremony conferred upon him the privileges of his brāhmin lineage,
including the worship of the Family Deity, Raghuvir, and imposed upon
him the many strict disciplines of a brāhmin\'s life. During the
ceremony of investiture he shocked his relatives by accepting a meal
cooked by his nurse, a Śudrā woman. His father would never have dreamt
of doing such a thing. But in a playful mood Gadādhar had once promised
this woman that he would eat her food, and now he fulfilled his plighted
word. The woman had piety and religious sincerity, and these were more
important to the boy than the conventions of society.

Gadādhar was now permitted to worship Raghuvir. Thus began his first
training in meditation. He so gave his heart and soul to the worship
that the stone image very soon appeared to him as the living Lord of the
Universe. His tendency to lose himself in contemplation was first
noticed at this time. Behind his boyish light-heartedness was seen a
deepening of his spiritual nature.

About this time, on the Śivarātri night, consecrated to the worship of
Śiva, a dramatic performance was arranged. The principal actor, who was
to play the part of Śiva, suddenly fell ill, and Gadādhar was persuaded
to act in his place. While friends were dressing him for the role of
Śiva - smearing his body with ashes, matting his locks, placing a
trident in his hand and a string of rudrākaśa beads around his neck -
the boy appeared to become absent-minded. He approached the stage with
slow and measured step, supported by his friends. He looked the living
image of Śiva. The audience loudly applauded what it took to be his
skill as an actor, but it was soon discovered that he was really lost in
meditation. His countenance was radiant and tears flowed from his eyes.
He was lost to the outer world. The effect of this scene on the audience
was tremendous. The people felt blessed as by a vision of Śiva Himself.
The performance had to be stopped, and the boy\'s mood lasted till the
following morning.

Gadādhar himself now organized a dramatic company with his young
friends. The stage was set in the mango orchard. The themes were
selected from the stories of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. Gadādhar
knew by heart almost all the roles, having heard them from professional
actors. His favourite theme was the Vrindāvan episode of Krishna\'s
life, depicting those exquisite love-stories of Krishna and the
milkmaids and the cowherd boys. Gadādhar would play the parts of Rādhā
or Krishna and would often lose himself in the character he was
portraying. His natural feminine grace heightened the dramatic effect.
The mango orchard would ring with the loud kirtan of the boys. Lost in
song and merry-making, Gadādhar became indifferent to the routine of
school.

In 1849 Rāmkumār, the eldest son, went to Calcutta to improve the
financial condition of the family.

Gadādhar was on the threshold of youth. He had become the pet of the
women of the village. They loved to hear him talk, sing, or recite from
the holy books. They enjoyed his knack of imitating voices. Their
woman\'s instinct recognized the innate purity and guilelessness of this
boy of clear skin, flowing hair, beaming eyes, smiling face, and
inexhaustible fun. The pious elderly women looked upon him as Gopālā,
the Baby Krishna,

*sādhus*

and the younger ones saw in him the youthful Krishna of Vrindāvan. He
himself so idealised the love of the gopis for Krishna that he sometimes
yearned to be born as a woman, if he must be born again, in order to be
able to love Sri Krishna with all his heart and soul.

**Coming to Calcutta**

At the age of sixteen Gadādhar was summoned to Calcutta by his elder
brother Rāmkumār, who wished assistance in his priestly duties. Rāmkumār
had opened a Sanskrit academy to supplement his income, and it was his
intention gradually to turn his younger brother\'s mind to education.
Gadādhar applied himself heart and soul to his new duty as family priest
to a number of Calcutta families. His worship was very different from
that of the professional priests. He spent hours decorating the images
and singing hymns and devotional songs; he performed with love the other
duties of his office. People were impressed with his ardour. But to his
studies he paid scant attention.

Rāmkumār did not at first oppose the ways of his temperamental brother.
He wanted Gadādhar to become used to the conditions of city life. But
one day he decided to warn the boy about his indifference to the world.
After all, in the near future Gadādhar must, as a householder, earn his
livelihood through the performance of his brāhminical duties; and these
required a thorough knowledge of Hindu law, astrology, and kindred
subjects. He gently admonished Gadādhar and asked him to pay more
attention to his studies. But the boy replied spiritedly: \"Brother,
what shall I do with a mere bread-winning education? I would rather
acquire that wisdom which will illumine my heart and give me
satisfaction for ever.\"

**Bread-winning Education**

The anguish of the inner soul of India found expression through these
passionate words of the young Gadādhar. For what did his unsophisticated
eyes see around him in Calcutta, at that time the metropolis of India
and the centre of modern culture and learning? Greed and lust held sway
in the higher levels of society, and the occasional religious practices
were merely outer forms from which the soul had long ago departed.

Gadādhar had never seen anything like this at Kāmārpukur among the
simple and pious villagers. The

and wandering monks whom he had served in his boyhood had revealed to
him an altogether different India. He had been impressed by their
devotion and purity, their self-control and renunciation. He had learnt
from them and from his own intuition that the ideal of life as taught by
the ancient sages of India was the realization of God.

When Rāmkumār reprimanded Gadādhar for neglecting a \"bread-winning
education\", the inner voice of the boy reminded him that the legacy of
his ancestors - the legacy of Rāmā, Krishna, Buddha, Sankara, Rāmānuja,
Chaitanya - was not worldly security but the Knowledge of God. And these
noble sages were the true representatives of Hindu society. Each of them
was seated, as it were, on the crest of the wave that followed each
successive trough in the tumultuous course of Indian national life. All
demonstrated that the life current of India is spirituality. This truth
was revealed to Gadādhar through that inner vision which scans past and
future in one sweep, unobstructed by the barriers of time and space. But
he was unaware of the history of the profound change that had taken
place in the land of his birth during the previous one hundred years.

Hindu society during the eighteenth century had been passing through a
period of decadence. It was the twilight of the Mussalman rule. There
were anarchy and confusion in all spheres. Superstitious practices
dominated the religious life of the people. Rites and rituals passed for
the essence of spirituality. Greedy priests became the custodians of
heaven. True philosophy was supplanted by dogmatic opinions. The pundits
took delight in vain polemics.

In 1757 English traders laid the foundation of British rule in India.
Gradually the Government was systematized and lawlessness suppressed.
The Hindus were much impressed by the military power and political
acumen of the new rulers. In the wake of the merchants came the English
educators, and social reformers, and Christian missionaries - all
bearing a culture completely alien to the Hindu mind. In different parts
of the country educational institutions were set up and Christian
churches established. Hindu young men were offered the heady wine of the
Western culture of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries,
and they drank it to

the very dregs.

The first effect of the draught on the educated Hindus was a complete
effacement from their minds of the time-honoured beliefs and traditions
of Hindu society. They came to believe that there was no transcendental
Truth. The world perceived by the senses was all that existed. God and
religion were illusions of the untutored mind. True knowledge could be
derived only from the analysis of nature. So atheism and agnosticism
became the fashion of the day. The youth of India, taught in English
schools, took malicious delight in openly breaking the customs and
traditions of their society. They would do away with the caste-system
and remove the discriminatory laws about food. Social reform, the spread
of secular education, widow remarriage, abolition of early marriage -
they considered these the panacea for the degenerate condition of Hindu
society.

The Christian missionaries gave the finishing touch to the process of
transformation. They ridiculed as relics of a barbarous age the images
and rituals of the Hindu religion. They tried to persuade India that the
teachings of her saints and seers were the cause of her downfall, that
her Vedas, Purānās, and other scriptures were filled with superstition.
Christianity, they maintained, had given the white races position and
power in this world and assurance of happiness in the next; therefore
Christianity was the best of all religions. Many intelligent young
Hindus became converted. The man in the street was confused. The
majority of the educated grew materialistic in their mental outlook.
Everyone living near Calcutta or the other strongholds of Western
culture, even those who attempted to cling to the orthodox traditions of
Hindu society, became infected by the new uncertainties and the new
beliefs.

But the soul of India was to be resuscitated through a spiritual
awakening. We hear the first call of this renascence in the spirited
retort of the young Gadādhar: \"Brother, what shall I do with a mere
bread-winning education?\"

Rāmkumār could hardly understand the import of his young brother\'s
reply. He described in bright colours the happy and easy life of
scholars in Calcutta society. But Gadādhar intuitively felt that the
scholars, to use one of his own vivid illustrations, were like so many
vultures, soaring high on the wings of their uninspired intellect, with
their eyes fixed on the charnel-pit of greed and lust. So he stood firm
and Rāmkumār had to give way.

**Kāli Temple at Dakshineśwar**

At that time there lived in Calcutta a rich widow named Rāni Rāsmani,
belonging to the Śudrā caste, and known far and wide not only for her
business ability, courage, and intelligence, but also for her largeness
of heart, piety, and devotion to God. She was assisted in the management
of her vast property by her son-in-law Mathur Mohan.

In 1847 the Rāni purchased twenty acres of land at Dakshineśwar, a
village about four miles north of Calcutta. Here she created a temple
garden and constructed several temples. Her Ishta, or Chosen Ideal, was
the Divine Mother, Kāli.

The temple garden stands directly on the east bank of the Ganges. The
northern section of the land and a portion to the east contain an
orchard, flower gardens, and two small reservoirs. The southern section
is paved with brick and mortar. The visitor arriving by boat ascends the
steps of an imposing bathing-Ghāt, which leads to the *Chāndni,* a
roofed terrace, on either side of which stand in a row six temples of
Śiva. East of the terrace and the Śiva temples is a large court, paved,
rectangular in shape, and running north and south. Two temples stand in
the centre of this court, the larger one, to the south and facing south,
being dedicated to Kāli, and the smaller one, facing the Ganges, to
Radhākānta, that is, Krishna, the Consort of Rādhā. Nine domes with
spires surmount the temple of Kāli, and before it stands the spacious
Natmandir, or music hall, the terrace of

which is supported by stately pillars. At the northwest and southwest
corners of the temple compound are two *Nahabats,* or music towers, from
which music flows at different times of day, especially at sunup, noon,
and

sundown, when the worship is performed in the temples. Three sides of
the paved courtyard -all except the west - are lined with rooms set
apart for kitchens, store-rooms, dining-rooms, and quarters for the
temple staff and guests. The chamber in the northwest angle, just beyond
the last of the Śiva temples, is of special

interest to us; for here Sri Ramakrishna was to spend a considerable
part of his life. To the west of this chamber is a semicircular porch
overlooking the river. In front of the porch runs a foot-path, north and
south, and beyond the path is a large garden and, below the garden, the
Ganges. The orchard to the north of the

buildings contains the Panchavati, the banyan, and the bel-tree,
associated with Sri Ramakrishna\'s spiritual practices. Outside and to
the north of the temple compound proper is the *Kuthi,* or bungalow,
used by

members of Rāni Rāsmani\'s family visiting the garden. And north of the
temple garden, separated from it by a high wall, is a powder-magazine
belonging to the British Government.

**Śiva**

In the twelve Śiva temples are installed the emblems of the Great God of
renunciation in His various aspects, worshipped daily with proper rites.
Śiva requires few articles of worship. White flowers and bel-leaves and
a little Ganges water offered with devotion are enough to satisfy the
benign Deity and win from Him the boon of liberation.

**Radhākānta**

The temple of Radhākānta, also known as the temple of Vishnu, contains
the images of Rādhā and Krishna, the symbol of union with God through
ecstatic love. The two images stand on a pedestal facing the west. The
floor is paved with marble. From the ceiling of the porch hang
chandeliers protected from dust by coverings of red cloth. Canvas
screens shield the images from the rays of the setting sun. Close to the
threshold of the inner shrine is a small brass cup containing holy
water. Devoted visitors reverently drink a few drops from the vessel.

**Kāli**

The main temple is dedicated to Kāli, the Divine Mother, here worshipped
as *Bhavatārini,* the Saviour of the Universe. The floor of this temple
also is paved with marble. The basalt image of the Mother, dressed in
gorgeous gold brocade, stands on a white marble image of the prostrate
body of Her Divine Consort, Śiva, the symbol of the Absolute. On the
feet of the Goddess are, among other ornaments, anklets of gold. Her
arms are decked with jeweled ornaments of gold. She wears necklaces of
gold and pearls, a golden garland of human heads, and a girdle of human
arms. She wears a golden crown, golden ear-rings, and a golden nose-ring
with a pearl-drop. She has four arms. The lower left hand holds a
severed human head and the upper grips a blood-stained *sabre.* One
right hand offers boons to Her children; the other allays their fear.
The majesty of Her posture can hardly be described. It combines the
terror of destruction with the reassurance of motherly tenderness. For
She is the Cosmic Power, the totality of the universe, a glorious
harmony of the pairs of opposites. She deals out death, as She creates
and preserves. She has three eyes, the third being the symbol of Divine
Wisdom; they strike dismay into the wicked, yet pour out affection for
Her devotees.

The whole symbolic world is represented in the temple garden - the
Trinity of the Nature Mother (Kāli), the Absolute (Śiva), and Love
(Radhākānta), the Arch spanning heaven and earth. The terrific Goddess
of the Tantra, the soul-enthralling Flute-Player of the Bhāgavata, and
the Self-absorbed Absolute of the Vedas live together, creating the
greatest synthesis of religions. All aspects of Reality are represented
there. But of this divine household, Kāli is the pivot, the sovereign
Mistress. She is *Prakriti,* the Procreatrix, Nature, the Destroyer, the
Creator. Nay, She is something greater and deeper still for those who
have eyes to see. She is the Universal Mother, \"my Mother\" as
Ramakrishna would say, the All-powerful, who reveals Herself to Her
children under different aspects and Divine Incarnations, the Visible
God, who leads the elect to the Invisible Reality; and if it so pleases
Her, She takes away the last trace of ego from created beings and merges
it in the consciousness of the Absolute, the undifferentiated God.
Through Her grace \"the finite ego loses itself in the illimitable
Ego-Ātman-Brahman\".

Rāni Rāsmani spent a fortune for the construction of the temple garden
and another fortune for its dedication ceremony, which took place on May
31, 1855.

Sri Ramakrishna - henceforth we shall call Gadādhar by this familiar
name - came to the temple garden with

his elder brother Rāmkumār, who was appointed priest of the Ka1i temple.
Sri Ramakrishna did not at first approve of Rāmkumār\'s working for the
Śudrā Rāsmani. The example of their orthodox father was still fresh in
Sri Ramakrishna\'s mind. He objected also to the eating of the cooked
offerings of the temple, since, according to orthodox Hindu custom, such
food can be offered to the Deity only in the house of a brāhmin. But the
holy atmosphere of the temple grounds, the solitude of the surrounding
wood, the loving care of his brother, the respect shown him by Rāni
Rāsmani and Mathur Bābu, the living presence of the Goddess Kāli in the
temple, and, above all, the proximity of the sacred Ganges, which Sri
Ramakrishna always held in the highest respect, gradually overcame his
disapproval, and he began to feel at home.

Within a very short time Sri Ramakrishna attracted the notice of Mathur
Bābu, who was impressed by the young man\'s religious fervour and wanted
him to participate in the worship in the Kāli temple. But Sri
Ramakrishna loved his freedom and was indifferent to any worldly career.
The profession of the priesthood in a temple founded by a rich woman did
not appeal to his mind. Further, he hesitated to take upon himself the
responsibility for the ornaments and jewellery of the temple. Mathur had
to wait for a suitable occasion.

At this time there came to Dakshineśwar a youth of sixteen, destined to
play an important role in Sri Ramakrishna\'s life. Hriday, a distant
nephew of Sri Ramakrishna, hailed from Sihore, a village not far from
Kāmārpukur, and had been his boyhood friend. Clever, exceptionally
energetic, and endowed with great presence of mind, he moved, as will be
seen later, like a shadow about his uncle and was always ready to help
him, even at the sacrifice of his personal comfort. He was destined to
be a mute witness of many of the spiritual experiences of Sri
Ramakrishna and the caretaker of his body during the stormy days of his
spiritual practice. Hriday came to Dakshineśwar in search of a job, and
Sri Ramakrishna was glad to see him.

Unable to resist the persuasion of Mathur Bābu, Sri Ramakrishna at last
entered the temple service, on condition that Hriday should be asked to
assist him. His first duty was to dress and decorate the image of Kāli.

One day the priest of the Radhākānta temple accidentally dropped the
image of Krishna on the floor, breaking one of its legs. The pundits
advised the Rāni to install a new image, since the worship of an image
with a broken limb was against the scriptural injunctions. But the Rāni
was fond of the image, and she asked Sri Ramakrishna\'s opinion. In an
abstracted mood, he said: \"This solution is ridiculous. If a son-in-law
of the Rāni broke his leg, would she discard him and put another in his
place? Wouldn\'t she rather arrange for his treatment? Why should she
not do the same thing in this case too? Let the image be repaired and
worshipped as before.\" It was a simple, straightforward solution and
was accepted by the Rāni. Sri Ramakrishna himself mended the break. The
priest was dismissed for his carelessness, and at Mathur Bābu\'s earnest
request, Sri Ramakrishna accepted the Office of priest in the Radhākānta
temple.

**Sri Ramakrishna as a priest**

Born in an orthodox brāhmin family, Sri Ramakrishna knew the formalities
of worship, its rites and rituals. The innumerable gods and goddesses of
the Hindu religion are the human aspects of the indescribable and
incomprehensible Spirit, as conceived by the finite human mind. They
understand and appreciate human love and emotion, help men to realize
their secular and spiritual ideals, and ultimately enable men to attain
liberation from the miseries of phenomenal life. The Source of light,
intelligence, wisdom, and strength is the One alone from whom comes the
fulfilment of desire. Yet, as long as a man is bound by his human
limitations, he cannot but worship God through human forms. He must use
human symbols. Therefore Hinduism asks the devotees to look on God as
the ideal father, the ideal mother, the ideal husband, the ideal son, or
the ideal friend. But the name ultimately leads to the Nameless, the
form to the Formless, the word to the Silence, the emotion to the serene
realization of Peace in Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. The gods
gradually merge in the one God. But until that realization is achieved,
the devotee cannot dissociate human factors from his worship. Therefore
the Deity is bathed and clothed and decked with ornaments. He is fed and
put to sleep. He is propitiated with hymns, songs, and prayers. And
there are appropriate rites connected with all these functions. For
instance, to secure for himself external purity, the priest bathes
himself in holy water and puts on a holy cloth. He purifies the mind and
the sense organs by appropriate meditations. He fortifies the place of
worship against evil forces by drawing around it circles of fire and
water. He awakens the different spiritual

centres of the body and invokes the Supreme Spirit in his heart. Then he
transfers the Supreme Spirit to the image before him and worships the
image, regarding it no longer as clay or stone, but as the embodiment of
Spirit, throbbing with Life and Consciousness. After the worship the
Supreme Spirit is recalled from the image to Its true sanctuary, the
heart of the priest. The real devotee knows the absurdity of worshipping
the Transcendental Reality with material articles - clothing That which
pervades the whole universe and the beyond, putting on a pedestal That
which cannot be limited by space, feeding That which is disembodied and
incorporeal, singing before That whose glory the music of the spheres
tries vainly to proclaim. But through these rites the devotee aspires to
go ultimately beyond rites and rituals, forms and names, words and
praise, and to realize God as the All-pervading Consciousness.

Hindu priests are thoroughly acquainted with the rites of worship, but
few of them are aware of their underlying significance. They move their
hands and limbs mechanically, in obedience to the letter of the
scriptures, and repeat the holy mantras like parrots. But from the very
beginning the inner meaning of these rites was revealed to Sri
Ramakrishna. As he sat facing the image, a strange transformation came
over his mind. While going through the prescribed ceremonies, he would
actually find himself encircled by a wall of fire protecting him and the
place of worship from unspiritual vibrations, or he would feel the
rising of the mystic Kundalini through the different centres of the
body. The glow on his face, his deep absorption, and the intense
atmosphere of the temple impressed everyone who saw him worship the
Deity.

Rāmkumār wanted Sri Ramakrishna to learn the intricate rituals of the
worship of Kāli. To become a priest of Kāli one must undergo a special
form of initiation from a qualified guru, and for Sri Ramakrishna a
suitable brāhmin was found. But no sooner did the brāhmin speak the holy
word in his ear than Sri Ramakrishna, overwhelmed with emotion, uttered
a loud cry and plunged into deep concentration.

Mathur begged Sri Ramakrishna to take charge of the worship in the Kāli
temple. The young priest pleaded his incompetence and his ignorance of
the scriptures. Mathur insisted that devotion and sincerity would more
than compensate for any lack of formal knowledge and make the Divine
Mother manifest Herself through the image. In the end, Sri Ramakrishna
had to yield to Mathur\'s request. He became the priest of Kāli.

In 1856 Rāmkumār breathed his last. Sri Ramakrishna had already
witnessed more than one death in the family. He had come to realize how
impermanent is life on earth. The more he was convinced of the
transitory nature of worldly things, the more eager he became to realize
God, the Fountain of Immortality.

+-------+-----+------------------------+------------------------------+
| **The |     |                        |                              |
| First |     |                        |                              |
| V     |     |                        |                              |
| ision |     |                        |                              |
| of    |     |                        |                              |
| K     |     |                        |                              |
| āli** |     |                        |                              |
+-------+-----+------------------------+------------------------------+
| And,  | >   | > discovered what a    | > he had chosen to serve. He |
| in    |  he | > strange Goddess      | > became gradually           |
| deed, | > s |                        |                              |
|       | oon |                        |                              |
+-------+-----+------------------------+------------------------------+
| enm   | >   | > of Her all-pervading | > the ignorant She is to be  |
| eshed | the | > presence. To         | > sure, the image of         |
| in    | >   |                        |                              |
|       | web |                        |                              |
+-------+-----+------------------------+------------------------------+
| de    |     |                        |                              |
| struc |     |                        |                              |
| tion: |     |                        |                              |
| but   |     |                        |                              |
| he    |     |                        |                              |
| found |     |                        |                              |
| in    |     |                        |                              |
| Her   |     |                        |                              |
| the   |     |                        |                              |
| be    |     |                        |                              |
| nign, |     |                        |                              |
| all-l |     |                        |                              |
| oving |     |                        |                              |
| Mo    |     |                        |                              |
| ther. |     |                        |                              |
| Her   |     |                        |                              |
| neck  |     |                        |                              |
| is    |     |                        |                              |
| enci  |     |                        |                              |
| rcled |     |                        |                              |
| with  |     |                        |                              |
| a     |     |                        |                              |
| ga    |     |                        |                              |
| rland |     |                        |                              |
| of    |     |                        |                              |
| h     |     |                        |                              |
| eads, |     |                        |                              |
+-------+-----+------------------------+------------------------------+

and Her waist with a girdle of human arms and two of Her hands hold
weapons of death, and Her eyes dart a glance of fire; but, strangely
enough, Ramakrishna felt in Her breath the soothing touch of tender love
and saw in Her the Seed of Immortality. She stands on the bosom of Her
Consort, Śiva; it is because She is the

Śakti, the Power, inseparable from the Absolute. She is surrounded by
jackals and other unholy creatures, the denizens of the cremation
ground. But is not the Ultimate Reality above holiness and unholiness?
She appears to be reeling under the spell of wine. But who would create
this mad world unless under the influence of a divine drunkenness? She
is the highest symbol of all the forces of nature, the synthesis of
their antinomies, the Ultimate Divine in the form of woman. She now
became to Sri Ramakrishna the only Reality, and the world became an
unsubstantial shadow. Into Her worship he poured his soul. Before him
She stood as the transparent portal to the shrine of Ineffable Reality.

The worship in the temple intensified Sri Ramakrishna\'s yearning for a
living vision of the Mother of the Universe. He began to spend in
meditation the time not actually employed in the temple service; and for
this purpose he selected an extremely solitary place. A deep jungle,
thick with underbrush and prickly plants, lay to the north of the
temples. Used at one time as a burial ground, it was shunned by people
even during the day-time for fear of ghosts. There Sri Ramakrishna began
to spend the whole night in meditation, returning to his

room only in the morning with eyes swollen as though from much weeping.
While meditating, he would lay aside his cloth and his brāhminical
thread. Explaining this strange conduct, he once said to Hriday:
\"Don\'t you know that when one thinks of God one should be freed from
all ties? From our very birth we have the eight fetters of hatred,
shame, lineage, pride of good conduct, fear, secretiveness, caste, and
grief. The sacred thread reminds me that I am a brāhmin and therefore
superior to all. When calling on the Mother one has to set aside all
such ideas.\" Hriday thought his uncle was becoming insane.

As his love for God deepened, he began either to forget or to drop the
formalities of worship. Sitting before the image, he would spend hours
singing the devotional songs of great devotees of the Mother, such as
Kamalākānta and Rāmprasād. Those rhapsodical songs, describing the
direct vision of God, only intensified Sri Ramakrishna\'s longing. He
felt the pangs of a child separated from its mother. Sometimes, in
agony, he would rub his face against the ground and weep so bitterly
that people, thinking he had lost his earthly mother, would sympathize
with him in his grief. Sometimes, in moments of scepticism, he would
cry: \"Art Thou true, Mother, or is it all fiction - mere poetry without
any reality? If Thou dost exist, why do I not see Thee? Is religion a
mere fantasy and art Thou only a figment of man\'s imagination?\"
Sometimes he would sit on the prayer carpet for two hours like an inert
object. He began to behave in an abnormal manner, most of the time
unconscious of the world. He almost gave up food; and sleep left him
altogether.

But he did not have to wait very long. He has thus described his first
vision of the Mother: \"I felt as if my heart were being squeezed like a
wet towel. I was overpowered with a great restlessness and a fear that
it might not be my lot to realize Her in this life. I could not bear the
separation from Her any longer. Life seemed to be not worth living.
Suddenly my glance fell on the sword that was kept in the Mother\'s
temple. I determined to put an end to my life. When I jumped up like a
madman and seized it, suddenly the blessed Mother revealed Herself. The
buildings with their different parts, the temple, and everything else
vanished from my sight, leaving no trace whatsoever, and in their stead
I saw a limitless, infinite, effulgent Ocean of Consciousness. As far as
the eye could see, the shining billows were madly rushing at me from all
sides with a terrific noise, to swallow me up! I was panting for breath.
I was caught in the rush and collapsed, unconscious. What was happening
in the outside world I did not know; but within me there was a steady
flow of undiluted bliss, altogether new, and I felt the presence of the
Divine Mother.\" On his lips when he regained consciousness of the world
was the word \"Mother\".

**God-Intoxicated State**

Yet this was only a foretaste of the intense experiences to come. The
first glimpse of the Divine Mother made him the more eager for Her
uninterrupted vision. He wanted to see Her both in meditation and with
eyes open. But the Mother began to play a teasing game of hide-and-seek
with him, intensifying both his joy and his suffering. Weeping bitterly
during the moments of separation from Her, he would pass into a trance
and then find Her standing before him, smiling, talking, consoling,
bidding him be of good cheer, and instructing him. During this period of
spiritual practice he had many uncommon experiences. When he sat to
meditate, he would hear strange clicking sounds in the joints of his
legs, as if someone were locking them up, one after the other, to keep
him motionless; and at the conclusion of his meditation he would again
hear the same sounds, this time unlocking them and leaving him free to
move about. He would see flashes like a swarm of fire-flies floating
before his eyes, or a sea of deep mist around him, with luminous waves
of molten silver. Again, from a sea of translucent mist he would behold
the Mother rising, first Her feet, then Her waist, body, face, and head,
finally Her whole person; he would feel Her breath and hear Her voice.
Worshipping in the temple, sometimes he would become exalted, sometimes
he would remain motionless as stone, sometimes he would almost collapse
from excessive emotion. Many of his actions, contrary to all tradition,
seemed sacrilegious to the people. He would take a flower and touch it
to his own head, body, and feet, and then offer it to the Goddess. Or,
like a drunkard, he would reel to the throne of the Mother, touch Her
chin by way of showing his affection for Her, and sing, talk, joke,
laugh, and dance. Or he would take a morsel of food from the plate and
hold it to Her mouth, begging Her to eat it, and would not be satisfied
till he was convinced that She had really eaten. After the Mother had
been put to sleep at night, from his own room he would hear Her
ascending to the upper storey of the temple with the light steps of a
happy girl, Her anklets jingling. Then he would discover Her

standing with flowing hair, Her black form silhouetted against the sky
of the night looking at the Ganges or at the distant lights of Calcutta.

Naturally the temple officials took him for an insane person. His
worldly well-wishers brought him to skilled physicians; but no medicine
could cure his malady. Many a time he doubted his sanity himself. For he
had been sailing across an uncharted sea, with no earthly guide to
direct him. His only haven of security was the Divine Mother Herself. To
Her he would pray: \"I do not know what these things are. I am ignorant
of mantras and the scriptures. Teach me, Mother, how to realize Thee.
Who else can help me? Art Thou not my only refuge and guide?\" And the
sustaining presence of the Mother never failed him in his distress or
doubt. Even those who criticized his conduct were greatly impressed with
his purity, guilelessness, truthfulness, integrity, and holiness. They
felt an uplifting influence in his presence.

It is said that Samādhi, or trance, no more than opens the portal of the
spiritual realm. Sri Ramakrishna felt an unquenchable desire to enjoy
God in various ways. For his meditation he built a place in the northern
wooded section of the temple garden. With Hriday\'s help he planted
there five sacred trees. The spot, known as the Panchavati, became the
scene of many of his visions.

As his spiritual mood deepened he more and more felt himself to be a
child of the Divine Mother. He learnt to surrender himself completely to
Her will and let Her direct him.

\"O Mother,\" he would constantly pray, \"I have taken refuge in Thee.
Teach me what to do and what to say. Thy will is paramount everywhere
and is for the good of Thy children. Merge my will in Thy will and make
me Thy instrument.\"

His visions became deeper and more intimate. He no longer had to
meditate to behold the Divine Mother. Even while retaining consciousness
of the outer world, he would see Her as tangibly as the temples, the
trees, the river, and the men around him.

On a certain occasion Mathur Bābu stealthily entered the temple to watch
the worship. He was profoundly moved by the young priest\'s devotion and
sincerity. He realized that Sri Ramakrishna had transformed the stone
image into the living Goddess.

Sri Ramakrishna one day fed a cat with the food that was to be offered
to Kāli. This was too much for the manager of the temple garden, who
considered himself responsible for the proper conduct of the worship. He
reported Sri Ramakrishna\'s insane behaviour to Mathur Bābu.

Sri Ramakrishna has described the incident: \"The Divine Mother revealed
to me in the Kāli temple that it was She who had become everything. She
showed me that everything was full of Consciousness. The image was
Consciousness, the altar was Consciousness, the water-vessels were
Consciousness, the door-sill was Consciousness, the marble floor was
Consciousness - all was Consciousness. I found everything inside the
room soaked, as it were, in Bliss - the Bliss of God. I saw a wicked man
in front of the Kāli temple; but in him also I saw the power of the
Divine Mother vibrating. That was why I fed a cat with the food that was
to be offered to the Divine Mother. I clearly perceived that all this
was the Divine Mother - even the cat. The manager of the temple garden
wrote to Mathur Bābu saying that I was feeding the cat with the offering
intended for the Divine Mother. But Mathur Bābu had insight into the
state of my mind. He wrote back to the manager: \'Let him do whatever he
likes. You must not say anything to him.\' \"

One of the painful ailments from which Sri Ramakrishna suffered at this
time was a burning sensation in his body, and he was cured by a strange
vision. During worship in the temple, following the scriptural
injunctions, he would imagine the presence of the \"sinner\" in himself
and the destruction of this \"sinner\". One day he was meditating in the
Panchavati, when he saw come out of him a red-eyed man of black
complexion, reeling like a drunkard. Soon there emerged from him another
person, of serene countenance, wearing the ochre cloth of a sannyāsi and
carrying in his hand a trident. The second person attacked the first and
killed him with the trident. Thereafter Sri Ramakrishna was free of his
pain.

*Bhāva-mukha,*

About this time he began to worship God by assuming the attitude of a
servant toward his master. He imitated the mood of Hanuman, the monkey
chieftain of the Ramayana, the ideal servant of Rāmā and traditional
model for this self-effacing form of devotion. When he meditated on
Hanuman his movements and his way of life began to resemble those of a
monkey. His eyes became restless. He lived on fruits and roots. With his
cloth tied around his waist, a portion of it hanging in the form of a
tail, he jumped from place to place instead of walking. And after a
short while he was blessed with a vision of Sitā, the divine consort of
Rāmā, who entered his body and disappeared there with the words, \"I
bequeath to you my smile.\"

Mathur had faith in the sincerity of Sri Ramakrishna\'s spiritual zeal,
but began now to doubt his sanity. He had watched him jumping about like
a monkey. One day, when Rāni Rāsmani was listening to Sri Ramakrishna\'s
singing in the temple, the young priest abruptly turned and slapped her.
Apparently listening to his song, she had actually been thinking of a
lawsuit. She accepted the punishment as though the Divine Mother Herself
had imposed it; but Mathur was distressed. He begged Sri Ramakrishna to
keep his feelings under control and to heed the conventions of society.
God Himself, he argued, follows laws. God never permitted, for instance,
flowers of two colours to grow on the same stalk. The following day Sri
Ramakrishna presented Mathur Bābu with two hibiscus flowers growing on
the same stalk, one red and one white.

Mathur and Rāni Rāsmani began to ascribe the mental ailment of Sri
Ramakrishna in part, at least, to his observance of rigid continence.
Thinking that a natural life would relax the tension of his nerves, they
engineered a plan with two women of ill fame. But as soon as the women
entered his room, Sri Ramakrishna beheld in them the manifestation of
the Divine Mother of the Universe and went into Samādhi uttering Her
name.

**Haladhāri**

In 1858 there came to Dakshineśwar a cousin of Sri Ramakrishna,
Haladhāri by name, who was to remain there about eight years. On account
of Sri Ramakrishna\'s indifferent health, Mathur appointed this man to
the office of priest in the Kāli temple. He was a complex character,
versed in the letter of the scriptures, but hardly aware of their
spirit. He loved to participate in hair-splitting theological
discussions and, by the measure of his own erudition, he proceeded to
gauge Sri Ramakrishna. An orthodox brāhmin, he thoroughly disapproved of
his cousin\'s unorthodox actions, but he was not unimpressed by Sri
Ramakrishna\'s purity of life, ecstatic love of God, and yearning for
realization.

One day Haladhāri upset Sri Ramakrishna with the statement that God is
incomprehensible to the human mind. Sri Ramakrishna has described the
great moment of doubt when he wondered whether his visions had really
misled him: \"With sobs I prayed to the Mother, \'Canst Thou have the
heart to deceive me like this because I am a fool?\' A stream of tears
flowed from my eyes. Shortly afterwards I saw a volume of mist rising
from the floor and filling the space before me. In the midst of it there
appeared a face with flowing beard,

calm, highly expressive, and fair. Fixing its gaze steadily upon me, it
said solemnly, \'Remain in

on the threshold of relative consciousness.\' This it repeated three
times and then it gently disappeared in the mist, which itself
dissolved. This vision reassured me.\"

A garbled report of Sri Ramakrishna\'s failing health, indifference to
worldly life, and various abnormal activities reached Kāmārpukur and
filled the heart of his poor mother with anguish. At her repeated
request he returned to his village for a change of air. But his boyhood
friends did not interest him any more. A divine fever was consuming him.
He spent a great part of the day and night in one of the cremation
grounds, in meditation. The place reminded him of the impermanence of
the human body, of human hopes and achievements. It also reminded him of
Kāli, the Goddess of destruction.

**Marriage and After**

But in a few months his health showed improvement, and he recovered to
some extent his natural buoyancy of spirit. His happy mother was
encouraged to think it might be a good time to arrange his marriage. The
boy was now twenty-three years old. A wife would bring him back to
earth. And she was delighted when her son

welcomed her suggestion. Perhaps he saw in it the finger of God.

Saradāmani, a little girl of five, lived in the neighbouring village
called Jayrāmbāti. Even at this age she had been praying to God to make
her character as stainless and fragrant as the white tuberose. Looking
at the full moon, she would say: \"O God, there are dark spots even on
the moon. But make my character spotless.\" It was she who was selected
as the bride for Sri Ramakrishna.

The marriage ceremony was duly performed. Such early marriage in India
is in the nature of a betrothal, the marriage being consummated when the
girl attains puberty. But in this case the marriage remained for ever
unconsummated. Sri Ramakrishna lived at Kāmārpukur about a year and a
half and then returned to Dakshineśwar.

Hardly had he crossed the threshold of the Kāli temple when he found
himself again in the whirlwind. His madness reappeared tenfold. The same
meditation and prayer, the same ecstatic moods, the same burning
sensation, the same weeping, the same sleeplessness, the same
indifference to the body and the outside world, the same divine
delirium. He subjected himself to fresh disciplines in order to
eradicate greed and lust, the two great impediments to spiritual
progress. With a rupee in one hand and some earth in the other, he would
reflect on the comparative value of these two for the realization of
God, and finding them equally worthless he would toss them, with equal
indifference, into the Ganges. Women he regarded as the manifestations
of the Divine Mother. Never even in a dream did he feel the impulses of
lust. And to root out of his mind the idea of caste superiority, he
cleaned a pariah\'s house with his long and neglected hair. When he
would sit in meditation, birds would perch on his head and peck in his
hair for grains of food. Snakes would crawl over his body, and neither
would he aware of the other. Sleep left him altogether. Day and night,
visions flitted before him. He saw the sannyāsi who had previously
killed the \"sinner\" in him again coming out of his body, threatening
him with the trident, and ordering him to concentrate on God. Or the
same sannyāsi would visit distant places, following a luminous path, and
bring him reports of what was happening there. Sri Ramakrishna used to
say later that in the case of an advanced devotee the mind itself
becomes the guru, living and moving like an embodied being.

Rāni Rāsmani, the foundress of the temple garden, passed away in 1861.
After her death her son-in-law Mathur became the sole executor of the
estate. He placed himself and his resources at the disposal of Sri
Ramakrishna and began to look after his physical comfort. Sri
Ramakrishna later spoke of him as one of his five \"suppliers of
stores\" appointed by the Divine Mother. Whenever a desire arose in his
mind, Mathur fulfilled it without hesitation.

**The Brāhmani**

There came to Dakshineśwar at this time a brāhmin woman who was to play
an important part in Sri Ramakrishna\'s spiritual unfoldment. Born in
East Bengāl, she was an adept in the Tāntrik and Vaishnava methods of
worship. She was slightly over fifty years of age, handsome, and garbed
in the orange robe of a nun. Her sole possessions were a few books and
two pieces of wearing-cloth.

Sri Ramakrishna welcomed the visitor with great respect, described to
her his experiences and visions, and told her of people\'s belief that
these were symptoms of madness. She listened to him attentively and
said: \"My son, everyone in this world is mad. Some are mad for money,
some for creature comforts, some for name and fame; and you are mad for
God.\" She assured him that he was passing through the almost unknown
spiritual experience described in the scriptures as *Mahā--bhāva,* the
most exalted rapture of divine love. She told him that this extreme
exaltation had been described as manifesting itself through nineteen
physical symptoms, including the shedding of tears, a tremor of the
body, horripilation, perspiration, and a burning sensation. The Bhakti
scriptures, she declared, had recorded only two instances of the
experience, namely, those of Sri Rādhā and Sri Chaitanya.

Very soon a tender relationship sprang up between Sri Ramakrishna and
the Brāhmani, she looking upon him as the Baby Krishna, and he upon her
as mother. Day after day, she watched his ecstasy during the kirtan and

*Mahā-bhāva*

meditation, his Samādhi, his mad yearning; and she recognized in him a
power to transmit spirituality to others. She came to the conclusion
that such things were not possible for an ordinary devotee, not even for
a highly developed soul. Only an Incarnation of God was capable of such
spiritual manifestations. She proclaimed openly that Sri Ramakrishna,
like Sri Chaitanya, was an Incarnation of God.

When Sri Ramakrishna told Mathur what the Brāhmani had said about him,
Mathur shook his head in doubt. He was reluctant to accept him as an
Incarnation of God, an Avatar comparable to Rāmā, Krishna, Buddha, and
Chaitanya, though he admitted Sri Ramakrishna\'s extraordinary
spirituality. Whereupon the Brāhmani asked Mathur to arrange a
conference of scholars who should discuss the matter with her. He agreed
to the proposal and the meeting was arranged. It was to be held in the
Natmandir in front of the Kāli temple.

Two famous pundits of the time were invited: Vaishnavcharan, the leader
of the Vaishnava society, and Gauri. The first to arrive was
Vaishnavcharan, with a distinguished company of scholars and devotees.
The Brāhmani, like a proud mother, proclaimed her view before him and
supported it with quotations from the scriptures. As the pundits
discussed the deep theological question, Sri Ramakrishna, perfectly
indifferent to everything happening around him, sat in their midst like
a child, immersed in his own thoughts, sometimes smiling, sometimes
chewing a pinch of spices from a pouch, or again saying to
Vaishnavcharan with a nudge: \"Look here. Sometimes I feel like this,
too.\" Presently Vaishnavcharan arose to declare himself in total
agreement

with the view of the Brāhmani. He declared that Sri Ramakrishna had
undoubtedly experienced

and that this was the certain sign of the rare manifestation of God in a
man. The people assembled there, especially the officers of the temple
garden, were struck dumb. Sri Ramakrishna said to Mathur, like a boy:
\"Just fancy, he too says so! Well, I am glad to learn that, after all,
it is not a disease.\"

When, a few days later, Pundit Gauri arrived, another meeting was held,
and he agreed with the view of the Brāhmani and Vaishnavcharan. To Sri
Ramakrishna\'s remark that Vaishnavcharan had declared him to be an
*Avatār,* Gauri replied: \"Is that all he has to say about you? Then he
has said very little. I am fully convinced that you are that Mine of
Spiritual Power, only a small fraction of which descends on earth, from
time to time, in the form of an Incarnation.\"

\"Ah!\" said Sri Ramakrishna with a smile, \"You seem to have quite
outbid Vaishnavcharan in this matter. What have you found in me that
makes you entertain such an idea?\"

Gauri said: \"I feel it in my heart and I have the scriptures on my
side. I am ready to prove it to anyone who challenges me.\"

\"Well,\" Sri Ramakrishna said, \"it is you who say so; but, believe me,
I know nothing about it.\"

Thus, the insane priest was, by verdict of the great scholars of the
day, proclaimed a Divine Incarnation. His visions were not the result of
an over heated brain; they had precedent in spiritual history. And how
did the proclamation affect Sri Ramakrishna himself? He remained the
simple child of the Mother that he had been since the first day of his
life. Years later, when two of his householder disciples openly spoke of
him as a Divine Incarnation and the matter was reported to him, he said
with a touch of sarcasm: \"Do they think they will enhance my glory that
way? One of them is an actor on the stage and the other a physician.
What do they know about Incarnations? Why years ago pundits like Gauri
and Vaishnavcharan declared me to be an Avatar. They were great scholars
and knew what they said. But that did not make any change in my mind.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was a learner all his life. He often used to quote a
proverb to his disciples: \"Friend, the more I live the more I learn.\"
When the excitement created by the Brāhmani\'s declaration was over, he
set himself to the task of practising spiritual disciplines according to
the traditional methods laid down in the Tantra and Vaishnava
scriptures. Hitherto he had pursued his spiritual ideal according to the
promptings of his own mind and heart. Now he accepted the Brāhmani as
his guru and set foot on the traditional highways.

**Tantra**

According to the Tantra, the Ultimate Reality is *Chit,* or
Consciousness, which is identical with *Sat,* or Being, and with
*Ānanda,* or Bliss. This Ultimate Reality, *Satchidānanda,*
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute, is

identical with the Reality preached in the Vedas. And man is identical
with this Reality; but under the influence of *Māyā,* or illusion, he
has forgotten his true nature. He takes to be real a merely apparent
world of subject and object, and this error is the cause of his bondage
and suffering. The goal of spiritual discipline is the rediscovery of
his true identity with the divine Reality.

For the achievement of this goal the Vedānta prescribes an austere
negative method of discrimination and renunciation, which can be
followed by only a few individuals endowed with sharp intelligence and
unshakeable will-power. But Tantra takes into consideration the natural
weakness of human beings, their lower appetites, and their love for the
concrete. It combines philosophy with rituals, meditation with
ceremonies, renunciation with enjoyment. The underlying purpose is
gradually to train the aspirant to meditate on his identity with the
Ultimate.

The average man wishes to enjoy the material objects of the world.
Tantra bids him enjoy these, but at the same time, discover in them the
presence of God. Mystical rites are prescribed by which, slowly, the
sense objects become spiritualized and sense attraction is transformed
into a love of God. So the very \"bonds\" of man are turned into
\"releasers\". The very poison that kills is transmuted into the elixir
of life. Outward renunciation is not necessary. Thus, the aim of Tantra
is to sublimate *Bhoga,* or enjoyment, into *Yoga,* or union with
Consciousness. For, according to this philosophy, the world with all its
manifestations is nothing but the sport of Śiva and Śakti, the Absolute
and Its inscrutable Power.

The disciplines of Tantra are graded to suit aspirants of all degrees.
Exercises are prescribed for people with \"animal\", \"heroic\", and
\"divine\" outlooks. Certain of the rites require the presence of
members of the opposite sex. Here the aspirant learns to look on woman
as the embodiment of the Goddess Kāli, the Mother of the Universe. The
very basis of Tantra is the Motherhood of God and the glorification of
woman. Every part of a woman\'s body is to be regarded as incarnate
Divinity. But the rites are extremely dangerous. The help of a qualified
guru is absolutely necessary. An unwary devotee may lose his foothold
and fall into a pit of depravity.

According to the Tantra, Śakti is the active creative force in the
universe. Śiva, the Absolute, is a more or less passive principle.
Further, Śakti is as inseparable from Śiva as fire\'s power to burn is
from fire itself. Śakti, the Creative Power, contains in Its womb the
universe, and therefore is the Divine Mother. All women are Her symbols.
Kāli is one of Her several forms. The meditation on Kāli, the Creative
Power, is the central discipline of the Tantra. While meditating, the
aspirant at first regards himself as one with the Absolute and then
thinks that out of that Impersonal Consciousness emerge two entities,
namely, his own self and the living form of the Goddess. He then
projects the Goddess into the tangible image before him and worships it
as the Divine Mother.

Sri Ramakrishna set himself to the task of practising the disciplines of
Tantra; and at the bidding of the Divine Mother Herself he accepted the
Brāhmani as his guru. He performed profound and delicate ceremonies in
the Panchavati and under the bel-tree at the northern extremity of the
temple compound. He practised all the disciplines of the sixty-four
principal Tantra books, and it took him never more than three days to
achieve the result promised in any one of them. After the observance of
a few preliminary rites, he would be overwhelmed with a strange divine
fervour and would go into Samādhi, where his mind would dwell in
exaltation. Evil ceased to exist for him. The word \"carnal\" lost its
meaning. The whole world and everything in it appeared as the Lila, the
sport, of Śiva and Śakti. He beheld everywhere manifest the power and
beauty of the Mother, the whole world, animate and inanimate, appeared
to him as pervaded with Chit, Consciousness, and with Ānanda, Bliss.

He saw in a vision the Ultimate Cause of the universe as a huge luminous
triangle giving birth every moment to an infinite number of worlds. He
heard the *Anāhata Śabda,* the great sound **Om,** of which the
innumerable sounds of the universe are only so many echoes. He acquired
the eight supernatural powers of Yoga, which make a man almost
omnipotent, and these he spurned as of no value whatsoever to the
Spirit. He had a vision of the divine Māyā, the inscrutable Power of
God, by which the universe is created and sustained, and into

which it is finally absorbed. In this vision he saw a woman of exquisite
beauty, about to become a mother, emerging from the Ganges and slowly
approaching the Panchavati. Presently she gave birth to a child and
began to nurse it tenderly. A moment later she assumed a terrible
aspect, seized the child with her grim jaws and crushed it. Swallowing
it, she re-entered the waters of the Ganges.

But the most remarkable experience during this period was the awakening
of the *Kundalini Śakti,* the \"Serpent

Power\". He actually saw the Power, at first lying asleep at the bottom
of the spinal column, then waking up and ascending along the mystic
*Sushumna* canal and through its six centres, or lotuses, to the
*Sahasrāra,* the

thousand-petalled lotus in the top of the head. He further saw that as
the Kundalini went upward the different lotuses bloomed. And this
phenomenon was accompanied by visions and trances. Later on he described
to his disciples and devotees the various movements of the Kundalini:
the fishlike, birdlike, monkey like, and so on.

The awakening of the Kundalini is the beginning of spiritual
consciousness, and its union with Śiva in the *Sahasrāra,* ending in
Samādhi, is the consummation of the Tāntrik disciplines.

About this time it was revealed to him that in a short while many
devotees would seek his guidance.

**Vaishnava Disciplines**

After completing the Tāntrik sādhana Sri Ramakrishna followed the
Brāhmani in the disciplines of Vaishnavism. The Vaishnavas are
worshippers of Vishnu, the \"All-pervading\", the Supreme God, who is
also known as Hari and Nārāyana. Of Vishnu\'s various Incarnations the
two with the largest number of followers are Rāmā and Krishna.

Vaishnavism is exclusively a religion of bhakti. Bhakti is intense love
of God, attachment to Him alone; it is of the nature of bliss and
bestows upon the lover immortality and liberation. God, according to
Vaishnavism, cannot be realized through logic or reason; and, without
bhakti, all penances, austerities, and rites are futile. Man cannot
realize God by self-exertion alone. For the vision of God His grace is
absolutely necessary, and this grace is felt by the pure of heart. The
mind is to be purified through bhakti. The pure mind then remains for
ever immersed in the ecstasy of God-vision. It is the cultivation of
this divine love that is the chief concern of the Vaishnava religion.

There are three kinds of formal devotion: tāmasic, rājasic, and sāttvic.
If a person, while showing devotion to God, is actuated by malevolence,
arrogance, jealousy, or anger, then his devotion is tāmasic, since it is
influenced by tamas, the quality of inertia. If he worships God from a
desire for fame or wealth, or from any other worldly ambition, then his
devotion is rājasic, since it is influenced by rajas, the quality of
activity. But if a person loves God without any thought of material
gain, if he performs his duties to please God alone and maintains toward
all created beings the attitude of friendship, then his devotion is
called sāttvic, since it is influenced by sattva, the quality of
harmony. But the highest devotion transcends the three *gunās,* or
qualities, being a spontaneous, uninterrupted inclination of the mind
toward God, the Inner Soul of all beings; and it wells up in the heart
of a true devotee as soon as he hears the name of God or mention of
God\'s attributes. A devotee possessed of this love would not accept the
happiness of heaven if it were offered him. His one desire is to love
God under all conditions - in pleasure and pain, life and death, honour
and dishonour, prosperity and adversity.

There are two stages of bhakti. The first is known as *Vaidhi--Bhakti,*
or love of God qualified by scriptural injunctions. For the devotees of
this stage are prescribed regular and methodical worship, hymns,
prayers, the

repetition of God\'s name, and the chanting of His glories. This lower
bhakti in course of time matures into *Parā--Bhakti,* or supreme
devotion, known also as *Prema,* the most intense form of divine love.
Divine love is

an end in itself. It exists potentially in all human hearts, but in the
case of bound creatures it is misdirected to earthly objects.

To develop the devotee\'s love for God, Vaishnavism humanises God. God
is to be regarded as the devotee\'s Parent, Master, Friend, Child,
Husband, or Sweetheart, each succeeding relationship representing an
intensification of love. These *Bhāvās,* or attitudes toward God, are
known as Śānta, Dāsya, Sakhya, Vātsalya,

and Madhur. The rishis of the Vedās, Hanumān, the cowherd boys of
Vrindāvan, Rāmā\'s mother Kausalya, and Rādhika, Krishna\'s sweetheart,
exhibited, respectively, the most perfect examples of these forms. In
the ascending scale the glories of God are gradually forgotten and the
devotee realizes more and more the intimacy of divine communion. Finally
he regards himself as the mistress of his Beloved, and no artificial
barrier remains to separate him from his Ideal. No social or moral
obligation can bind to the earth his soaring spirit. He experiences
perfect union with the Godhead. Unlike the Vedantist, who strives to
transcend all varieties of the subject-object relationship, a devotee of
the Vaishnava path wishes to retain both his own individuality and the
personality of God. To him God is not an intangible Absolute, but the
*Purushottama,* the Supreme Person.

While practising the discipline of the Madhur Bhāva, the male devotee
often regards himself as a woman, in order to develop the most intense
form of love for Sri Krishna, the only *Purusha,* or man, in the
universe. This

assumption of the attitude of the opposite sex has a deep psychological
significance. It is a matter of common experience that an idea may be
cultivated to such an intense degree that every idea alien to it is
driven from the mind. This peculiarity of the mind may he utilised for
the subjugation of the lower desires and the development of the
spiritual nature. Now, the idea which is the basis of all desires and
passions in a man is the conviction of his indissoluble association with
a male body. If he can inoculate himself thoroughly with the idea that
he is a woman, he can get rid of the desires peculiar to his male body.
Again, the idea that he is a woman may in turn be made to give way to
another higher idea, namely, that he is neither man nor woman, but the
Impersonal Spirit. The Impersonal Spirit alone can enjoy real communion
with the Impersonal God. Hence the highest realization of the Vaishnava
draws close to the transcendental experience of the Vedantist.

A beautiful expression of the Vaishnava worship of God through love is
to be found in the Vrindāvan episode of the Bhāgavata. The gopis, or
milk-maids, of Vrindāvan regarded the six-year-old Krishna as their
Beloved. They sought no personal gain or happiness from this love. They
surrendered to Krishna their bodies, minds, and souls. Of all the gopis,
Rādhika, or Rādhā, because of her intense love for Him, was the closest
to Krishna. She manifested Mahā--bhāva and was united with her Beloved.
This union represents, through sensuous language, a supersensuous
experience.

Sri Chaitanya, also known as Gaurānga, Gorā, or Nimāi, born in Bengāl in
1485 and regarded as an Incarnation of God, is a great prophet of the
Vaishnava religion. Chaitanya declared the chanting of God\'s name to be
the most efficacious spiritual discipline for the Kali--Yuga.

Sri Ramakrishna, as the monkey Hanumān, had already worshipped God as
his Master. Through his devotion to Kāli he had worshipped God as his
Mother. He was now to take up the other relationships prescribed by the
Vaishnava scriptures.

**Ramlālā**

About the year 1864 there came to Dakshineśwar a wandering Vaishnava
monk, Jatādhāri, whose Ideal Deity was Rāmā. He always carried with him
a small metal image of the Deity, which he called by the endearing name
of Ramlālā, the Boy Rāmā. Toward this little image he displayed the
tender affection of Kausalya for her divine Son, Rāmā. As a result of
lifelong spiritual practice he had actually found in the metal image the
presence of his Ideal. Ramlālā was no longer for him a metal image, but
the living God. He devoted himself to nursing Rāmā, feeding Rāmā,
playing with Rāmā, taking Rāmā for a walk, and bathing Rāmā. And he
found that the image responded to his love.

Sri Ramakrishna, much impressed with his devotion, requested Jatādhāri
to spend a few days at Dakshineśwar. Soon Ramlālā became the favourite
companion of Sri Ramakrishna too. Later on he described to the devotees
how the little image would dance gracefully before him, jump on his
back, insist on being taken in his arms, run to the fields in the sun,
pluck flowers from the bushes, and play pranks like a naughty boy. A
very sweet relationship sprang up between him and Ramlālā, for whom he
felt the love of a mother.

One day Jatādhāri requested Sri Ramakrishna to keep the image and bade
him adieu with tearful eyes. He declared that Ramlālā had fulfilled his
innermost prayer and that he now had no more need of formal worship.

A few days later Sri Ramakrishna was blessed through Ramlālā with a
vision of Rāmachandra, whereby he realized that the Rāmā of the
Ramayana, the son of Daśaratha, pervades the whole universe as Spirit
and Consciousness; that He is its Creator, Sustainer, and Destroyer;
that, in still another aspect, He is the transcendental Brahman, without
form, attribute, or name.

While worshipping Ramlālā as the Divine Child, Sri Ramakrishna\'s heart
became filled with motherly tenderness, and he began to regard himself
as a woman. His speech and gestures changed. He began to move freely
with the ladies of Mathur\'s family, who now looked upon him as one of
their own sex. During this time he worshipped the Divine Mother as Her
companion or handmaid.

**In Communion with the Divine Beloved**

**Sri Ramakrishna now devoted himself to scaling the most inaccessible
and dizzy heights of dualistic worship, namely, the complete union with
Sri Krishna as the Beloved of the heart. He regarded himself as one of
the gopis of Vrindāvan, mad with longing for her divine Sweetheart. At
his request Mathur provided him with woman\'s dress and jewellery. In
this love pursuit, food and drink were forgotten. Day and night he wept
bitterly. The yearning turned into a mad frenzy; for the divine Krishna
began to play with him the old tricks He had played with the gopis. He
would tease and taunt, now and then revealing Himself, but always
keeping at a distance. Sri Ramakrishna\'s anguish brought on a return of
the old physical symptoms: the burning sensation, an oozing of blood
through the pores, a loosening of the joints, and the stopping of
physiological functions.**

**The Vaishnava scriptures advise one to propitiate Rādhā and obtain her
grace in order to realize Sri Krishna. So the tortured devotee now
turned his prayer to her. Within a short time he enjoyed her blessed
vision. He saw and felt the figure of Rādhā disappearing into his own
body.**

**He said later on: \"It is impossible to describe the heavenly beauty
and sweetness of Rādhā. Her very appearance showed that she had
completely forgotten herself in her passionate attachment to Krishna.
Her complexion was a light yellow.\"**

**Now one with Rādhā, he manifested the great ecstatic love, the
Mahā--bhāva which had found in her its fullest expression. Later Sri
Ramakrishna said: \"The manifestation in the same individual of the
nineteen different kinds of emotion for God is called, in the books on
bhakti, Mahā--bhāva. An ordinary man takes a whole lifetime to express
even a single one of these. But in this body \[meaning himself\] there
has been a complete manifestation of all nineteen.\"**

**The love of Rādhā is the precursor of the resplendent vision of Sri
Krishna, and Sri Ramakrishna soon experienced that vision. The
enchanting form of Krishna appeared to him and merged in his person. He
became Krishna; he totally forgot his own individuality and the world;
he saw Krishna in himself and in the universe. Thus he attained to the
fulfilment of the worship of the Personal God. He drank from the
fountain of Immortal Bliss. The agony of his heart vanished forever. He
realized Amrita, Immortality, beyond the shadow of death.**

**One day, listening to a recitation of the Bhāgavata on the verandah of
the Radhākānta temple he fell into a divine mood and saw the enchanting
form of Krishna. He perceived the luminous rays issuing from Krishna\'s
Lotus Feet in the form of a stout rope, which touched first the
Bhāgavata and then his own chest, connecting all three - God, the
scripture, and the devotee. \"After this vision,\" he used to say, \"I
came to realize that *Bhagavān--Bhakta--and--Bhāgavata* \--
God--Devotee--and--Scripture \-- are in reality, one and the same.\"**

***Vedānta***

***The Brāhmani was the enthusiastic teacher and astonished beholder of
Sri Ramakrishna in his spiritual progress. She became proud of the
achievements of her unique pupil. But the pupil himself was not
permitted to rest; his destiny beckoned him forward. His Divine Mother
would allow him no respite till he had left behind the entire realm of
duality with its visions, experiences, and ecstatic dreams. But for the
new ascent the old tender guides would not suffice. The Brāhmani, on
whom he had depended for three years saw her son escape from her to
follow the command of a teacher with masculine strength, a sterner mien,
a gnarled physique, and***

a virile voice. The new guru was a wandering monk, the sturdy Totāpuri,
whom Sri Ramakrishna learnt to address affectionately as *Nangta,* the
\"Naked One\", because of his total renunciation of all earthly objects
and

attachments, including even a piece of wearing-cloth.

Totāpuri was the bearer of a philosophy new to Sri Ramakrishna, the
non-dualistic Vedānta philosophy, whose

conclusions Totāpuri had experienced in his own life. This ancient Hindu
system designates the Ultimate Reality as Brahman, also described as
*Satchidānanda,* Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. Brahman is the only
Real

Existence. In It there is no time, no space, no causality, no
multiplicity. But through Māyā, Its inscrutable Power, time, space, and
causality are created and the One appears to break into the many. The
eternal Spirit appears as a manifold of individuals endowed with form
and subject to the conditions of time. The Immortal becomes a victim of
birth and death. The Changeless undergoes change. The sinless Pure Soul,
hypnotised by Its own Māyā, experiences the joys of heaven and the pains
of hell. But these experiences based on the duality of the
subject-object relationship are unreal. Even the vision of a Personal
God is, ultimately speaking, as illusory as the experience of any other
object. Man attains his liberation, therefore, by piercing the veil of
Māyā and rediscovering his total identity with Brahman. Knowing himself
to be one with the Universal Spirit, he realizes ineffable Peace. Only
then does he go beyond the fiction of birth and death; only then does he
become immortal. And this is the ultimate goal of all religions - to
dehypnotize the soul now hypnotized by its own ignorance.

The path of the Vedāntic discipline is the path of negation, *\"Neti\",*
in which, by stern determination, all that is unreal is both negated and
renounced. It is the path of jnāna, knowledge, the direct method of
realizing the Absolute. After the negation of everything relative,
including the discriminating ego itself, the aspirant merges in the One
without a Second, in the bliss of nirvikalpa Samādhi, where subject and
object are alike dissolved. The soul goes beyond the realm of thought.
The domain of duality is transcended. Māyā is left behind with all its
changes and modifications. The Real Man towers above the delusions of
creation, preservation, and destruction. An avalanche of indescribable
Bliss sweeps away all relative ideas of pain and pleasure, good and
evil. There shines in the heart the glory of the Eternal Brahman,
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. Knower, knowledge, and known are
dissolved in the Ocean of one eternal Consciousness; love, lover, and
beloved merge in the unbounded Sea of supreme Felicity; birth, growth,
and death vanish in infinite Existence. All doubts and misgivings are
quelled for ever; the oscillations of the mind are stopped; the momentum
of past actions is exhausted. Breaking down the ridge-pole of the
tabernacle in which the soul has made its abode for untold ages,
stilling the body, calming the mind, drowning the ego, the sweet joy of
Brahman wells up in that superconscious state. Space disappears into
nothingness, time is swallowed in eternity, and causation becomes a
dream of the past. Only Existence is. Ah! Who can describe what the soul
then feels in its communion with the Self?

Even when man descends from this dizzy height, he is devoid of ideas of
\"I\" and \"mine\"; he looks on the body as a mere shadow, an outer
sheath encasing the soul. He does not dwell on the past, takes no
thought for the future, and looks with indifference on the present. He
surveys everything in the world with an eye of equality; he is no longer
touched by the infinite variety of phenomena; he no longer reacts to
pleasure and pain. He remains unmoved whether he - that is to say, his
body - is worshipped by the good or tormented by the wicked; for he
realizes that it is the one Brahman that manifests Itself through
everything. The impact of such an experience devastates the body and
mind. Consciousness becomes blasted, as it were, with an excess of
Light. In the Vedānta books it is said that after the experience of
nirvikalpa Samādhi the body drops off like a dry leaf. Only those who
are born with a special mission for the world can return from this
height to the valleys of normal life. They live and move in the world
for the welfare of mankind. They are invested with a supreme spiritual
power. A divine glory shines through them.

**Totāpuri**

Totāpuri arrived at the Dakshineśwar temple garden toward the end of
1864. Perhaps born in the Punjab, he was the head of a monastery in that
province of India and claimed leadership of seven hundred sannyāsis.
Trained from early youth in the disciplines of the Advaita Vedānta, he
looked upon the world as an illusion. The

gods and goddesses of the dualistic worship were to him mere fantasies
of the deluded mind. Prayers, ceremonies, rites, and rituals had nothing
to do with true religion, and about these he was utterly indifferent.
Exercising self-exertion and unshakable will-power, he had liberated
himself from attachment to the sense-objects of the relative universe.
For forty years he had practised austere discipline on the bank of the
sacred Narmada and had finally realized his identity with the Absolute.
Thenceforward he roamed in the world as an unfettered soul, a lion free
from the cage. Clad in a loin-cloth, he spent his days under the canopy
of the sky alike in storm and sunshine, feeding his body on the slender
pittance of alms. He had been visiting the estuary of the Ganges. On his
return journey along the bank of the sacred river, led by the
inscrutable Divine Will, he stopped at Dakshineśwar.

Totāpuri, discovering at once that Sri Ramakrishna was prepared to be a
student of Vedānta, asked to initiate him into its mysteries. With the
permission of the Divine Mother, Sri Ramakrishna agreed to the proposal.
But Totāpuri explained that only a sannyāsi could receive the teaching
of Vedānta. Sri Ramakrishna agreed to renounce the world, but with the
stipulation that the ceremony of his initiation into the monastic order
be performed in secret, to spare the feelings of his old mother, who had
been living with him at Dakshineśwar.

On the appointed day, in the small hours of the morning, a fire was
lighted in the Panchavati. Totāpuri and Sri Ramakrishna sat before it.
The flame played on their faces. \"Ramakrishna was a small brown man
with a short beard and beautiful eyes, long dark eyes, full of light,
obliquely set and slightly veiled, never very wide open, but seeing
half-closed a great distance both outwardly and inwardly. His mouth was
open over his white teeth in a bewitching smile, at once affectionate
and mischievous. Of medium height, he was thin to emaciation and
extremely delicate. His temperament was high-strung, for he was
supersensitive to all the winds of joy and sorrow, both moral and
physical. He was indeed a living reflection of all that happened before
the mirror of his eyes, a two-sided mirror, turned both out and in.\"
Facing him, the other rose like a rock. He was very tall and robust, a
sturdy and tough oak. His constitution and mind were of iron. He was the
strong leader of men.

In the burning flame before him Sri Ramakrishna performed the rituals of
destroying his attachment to relatives, friends, body, mind,
sense-organs, ego, and the world. The leaping flame swallowed it all,
making the initiate free and pure. The sacred thread and the tuft of
hair were consigned to the fire, completing his severance from caste,
sex, and society. Last of all he burnt in that fire, with all that is
holy as his witness, his desire for enjoyment here and hereafter. He
uttered the sacred mantras giving assurance of safety and fearlessness
to all beings, who were only manifestations of his own Self. The rites
completed, the disciple received from the guru the loincloth and ochre
robe, the emblems of his new life.

The teacher and the disciple repaired to the meditation room near by.
Totāpuri began to impart to Sri Ramakrishna the great truths of Vedānta.
\"Brahman\", he said, \"is the only Reality, ever pure, ever illumined,
ever free, beyond the limits of time, space, and causation. Though
apparently divided by names and forms through the inscrutable power of
Māyā, that enchantress who makes the impossible possible, Brahman is
really One and undivided. When a seeker merges in the beatitude of
Samādhi, he does not perceive time and space or name and form, the
offspring of Māyā. Whatever is within the domain of Māyā is unreal. Give
it up. Destroy the prison-house of name and form and rush out of it with
the strength of a lion. Dive deep in search of the Self and realize It
through Samādhi. You will find the world of name and form vanishing into
void, and the puny ego dissolving in Brahman-Consciousness. You will
realize your identity with Brahman, Existence-Knowledge-Bliss
Absolute.\" Quoting the Upanishad, Totāpuri said \"That knowledge is
shallow by which one sees or hears or knows another. What is shallow is
worthless and can never give real felicity. But the Knowledge by which
one does not see another or hear another or know another, which is
beyond duality, is great, and through such Knowledge one attains the
Infinite Bliss. How can the mind and senses grasp That which shines in
the heart of all as the Eternal Subject?\"

Totāpuri asked the disciple to withdraw his mind from all objects of
relative world, including the gods and goddesses, and to concentrate on
the Absolute. But the task was not easy even for Sri Ramakrishna. He
found it impossible to take his mind beyond Kāli, the Divine Mother of
the Universe. \"After the initiation\", Sri Ramakrishna once said,
describing the event, \"Nangta began to teach me the various conclusions
of the

Advaita Vedānta and asked me to withdraw the mind completely from all
objects and dive deep into the Ātman. But in spite of all my attempts I
could not altogether cross the realm of name and form and bring my mind
to the unconditioned state. I had no difficulty in taking the mind from
all the objects of the world. But the radiant and too familiar figure of
the Blissful Mother, the Embodiment of the essence of Pure
Consciousness, appeared before me as a living reality. Her bewitching
smile prevented me from passing into the Great Beyond. Again and again I
tried, but She stood in my way every time. In despair I said to Nangta:
\'It is hopeless. I cannot raise my mind to the unconditioned state and
come face to face with Ātman.\' He grew excited and sharply said:
\'What? You can\'t do it? But you have to.\' He cast his eyes around.
Finding a piece of glass he took it up and stuck it between my eyebrows.
\'Concentrate the mind on this point!\' he thundered. Then with stern
determination I again sat to meditate. As soon as the gracious form of
the Divine Mother appeared before me, I used my discrimination as a
sword and with it clove Her in two. The last barrier fell. My spirit at
once soared beyond the relative plane and I lost myself in Samādhi.\"

Sri Ramakrishna remained completely absorbed in Samādhi for three days.
\"Is it really true?\" Totāpuri cried out in astonishment. \"Is it
possible that he has attained in a single day what it took me forty
years of strenuous practice to achieve? Great God! It is nothing short
of a miracle!\" With the help of Totāpuri, Sri Ramakrishna\'s mind
finally came down to the relative Plane.

Totāpuri, a monk of the most orthodox type, never stayed at a place more
than three days. But he remained at Dakshineśwar eleven months. He too
had something to learn.

Totāpuri had no idea of the struggles of ordinary men in the toils of
passion and desire. Having maintained all through life the guilelessness
of a child, he laughed at the idea of a man\'s being led astray by the
senses. He was convinced that the world, was Māyā and had only to be
denounced to vanish for ever. A born non-dualist, he had no faith in a
Personal God. He did not believe in the terrible aspect of Kāli, much
less in Her benign aspect. Music and the chanting of God\'s holy name
were to him only so much nonsense. He ridiculed the spending of emotion
on the worship of a Personal God.

**Kāli and Māyā**

Sri Ramakrishna, on the other hand, though fully aware, like his guru,
that the world is an illusory appearance, instead of slighting Māyā,
like an orthodox monist, acknowledged its power in the relative life. He
was all love and reverence for Māyā, perceiving in it a mysterious and
majestic expression of Divinity. To him Māyā itself was God, for
everything was God. It was one of the faces of Brahman. What he had
realized on the heights of the transcendental plane, he also found here
below, everywhere about him, under the mysterious garb of names and
forms. And this garb was a perfectly transparent sheath, through which
he recognized the glory of the Divine Immanence. Māyā, the mighty weaver
of the garb, is none other than Kāli, the Divine Mother. She is the
primordial Divine Energy, Śakti, and She can no more be distinguished
from the Supreme Brahman than can the power of burning be distinguished
from fire. She projects the world and again withdraws it. She spins it
as the spider spins its web. She is the Mother of the Universe,
identical with the Brahman of Vedānta, and with the Ātman of Yoga. As
eternal Lawgiver, She makes and unmakes laws; it is by Her imperious
will that karma yields its fruit. She ensnares men with illusion and
again releases them from bondage with a look of Her benign eyes. She is
the supreme Mistress of the cosmic play, and all objects, animate and
inanimate, dance by Her will. Even those who realize the Absolute in
nirvikalpa Samādhi are under Her jurisdiction as long as they still live
on the relative plane.

Thus, after Nirvikalpa Samādhi, Sri Ramakrishna realized Māyā in an
altogether new role. The binding aspect of Kāli vanished from before his
vision. She no longer obscured his understanding. The world became the
glorious manifestation of the Divine Mother. Māyā became Brahman. The
Transcendental Itself broke through the Immanent. Sri Ramakrishna
discovered that Māyā operates in the relative world in two ways, and he
termed these \"Avidyā--Māyā\" and \"Vidyā--Māyā\". Avidyā--Māyā
represents the dark forces of creation: sensuous desires, evil passions,
greed, lust, cruelty, and so on. It sustains the world system on the
lower planes. It is responsible for the round of man\'s birth and death.
It must be fought and vanquished. But Vidyā--Māyā is the higher force of
creation: the spiritual virtues, the enlightening qualities, kindness,
purity, love, devotion. Vidyā--

*Bhāva--*

Māyā elevates man to the higher planes of consciousness. With the help
of Vidyā--Māyā the devotee rids himself of Avidyā--Māyā; he then becomes
*Māyātita*, free of Māyā. The two aspects of Māyā are the two forces

of creation, the two powers of Kāli; and She stands beyond them both.
She is like the effulgent sun, bringing into existence and shining
through and standing behind the clouds of different colours and shapes,
conjuring up wonderful forms in the blue autumn heaven.

The Divine Mother asked Sri Ramakrishna not to be lost in the
featureless Absolute but to remain in

*mukha,* on the threshold of relative consciousness, the border line
between the Absolute and the Relative. He was to keep himself at the
\"sixth centre\" of Tantra, from which he could see not only the glory
of the seventh, but also the divine manifestations of the Kundalini in
the lower centres. He gently oscillated back and forth across the
dividing line. Ecstatic devotion to the Divine Mother alternated with
serene absorption in the Ocean of Absolute Unity. He thus bridged the
gulf between the Personal and the Impersonal, the immanent and the
transcendent aspects of Reality. This is a unique experience in the
recorded spiritual history of the world.

**Totāpuri\'s Lesson**

From Sri Ramakrishna Totāpuri had to learn the significance of Kāli, the
Great Fact of the relative world, and of Māyā, Her indescribable Power.

One day, when guru and disciple were engaged in an animated discussion
about Vedānta, a servant of the temple garden came there and took a coal
from the sacred fire that had been lighted by the great ascetic. He
wanted it to light his tobacco. Totāpuri flew into a rage and was about
to beat the man. Sri Ramakrishna rocked with laughter. \"What a shame!\"
he cried. \"You are explaining to me the reality of Brahman and the
illusoriness of the world; yet now you have so far forgotten yourself as
to be about to beat a man in a fit of passion. The power of Māyā is
indeed inscrutable!\" Totāpuri was embarrassed.

About this time Totāpuri was suddenly laid up with a severe attack of
dysentery. On account of this miserable illness he found it impossible
to meditate. One night the pain became excruciating. He could no longer
concentrate on Brahman. The body stood in the way. He became incensed
with its demands. A free soul, he did not at all care for the body. So
he determined to drown it in the Ganges. Thereupon he walked into the
river. But, lo! He walks to the other bank. Is there not enough water in
the Ganges? Standing dumbfounded on the other bank he looks back across
the water. The trees, the temples, the houses, are silhouetted against
the sky. Suddenly, in one dazzling moment, he sees on all sides the
presence of the Divine Mother. She is in everything; She is everything.
She is in the water; She is on land. She is the body; She is the mind.
She is pain; She is comfort. She is knowledge; She is ignorance. She is
life; She is death. She is everything that one sees, hears, or imagines.
She turns \"yea\" into \"nay\", and \"nay\" into \"yea\". Without Her
grace no embodied being can go beyond Her realm. Man has no free will.
He is not even free to die. Yet, again, beyond the body and mind She
resides in Her Transcendental Absolute aspect. She is the Brahman that
Totāpuri had been worshipping all his life.

Totāpuri returned to Dakshineśwar and spent the remaining hours of the
night meditating on the Divine Mother. In the morning he went to the
Kāli temple with Sri Ramakrishna and prostrated himself before the image
of the Mother. He now realized why he had spent eleven months at
Dakshineśwar. Bidding farewell to the disciple, he continued on his way,
enlightened.

Sri Ramakrishna later described the significance of Totāpuri\'s lessons:
\"When I think of the Supreme Being as inactive - neither creating nor
preserving nor destroying -, I call Him Brahman or *Purusha,* the
Impersonal God. When I think of Him as active - creating, preserving,
and destroying -, I call Him Śakti or Māyā or *Prakriti,* the Personal
God. But the distinction between them does not mean a difference. The
Personal and the Impersonal are the same thing, like milk and its
whiteness, the diamond and its lustre, the snake and its wriggling
motion. It is impossible to conceive of the one without the other. The
Divine Mother and Brahman are one.\"

After the departure of Totāpuri, Sri Ramakrishna remained for six months
in a state of absolute identity with Brahman. \"For six months at a
stretch\", he said, \"I remained in that state from which ordinary men
can never

return; generally the body falls off, after three weeks, like a sere
leaf. I was not conscious of day and night. Flies would enter my mouth
and nostrils just as they do a dead body\'s, but I did not feel them. My
hair became matted with dust.\"

His body would not have survived but for the kindly attention of a monk
who happened to be at Dakshineśwar at that time and who somehow realized
that for the good of humanity Sri Ramakrishna\'s body must be preserved.
He tried various means, even physical violence, to recall the fleeing
soul to the prison-house of the body, and during the resultant fleeting
moments of consciousness he would push a few morsels of food down Sri
Ramakrishna\'s throat. Presently Sri Ramakrishna received the command of
the Divine Mother to remain on the threshold of relative consciousness.
Soon thereafter he was afflicted with a serious attack of dysentery. Day
and night the pain tortured him, and his mind gradually came down to the
physical plane.

**Company of Holy Men and Devotees**

From now on Sri Ramakrishna began to seek the company of devotees and
holy men. He had gone through the storm and stress of spiritual
disciplines and visions. Now he realized an inner calmness and appeared
to others as a normal person. But he could not bear the company of
worldly people or listen to their talk. Fortunately the holy atmosphere
of Dakshineśwar and the liberality of Mathur attracted monks and holy
men from all parts of the country. *Sādhus* of all denominations -
monists and dualists, Vaishnavas and Vedāntists, Śāktās and worshippers
of Rāmā - flocked there in ever increasing numbers. Ascetics and
visionaries came to seek Sri Ramakrishna\'s advice. Vaishnavas had come
during the period of his Vaishnava sādhana, and Tāntriks when he
practised the disciplines of Tantra. Vedāntists began to arrive after
the departure of Totāpuri. In the room of Sri Ramakrishna, who was then
in bed with dysentery, the Vedāntists engaged in scriptural discussions,
and, forgetting his own physical suffering, he solved their doubts by
referring directly to his own experiences. Many of the visitors were
genuine spiritual souls, the unseen pillars of Hinduism, and their
spiritual lives were quickened in no small measure by the sage of
Dakshineśwar. Sri Ramakrishna in turn learnt from them anecdotes
concerning the ways and the conduct of holy men, which he subsequently
narrated to his devotees and disciples. At his request Mathur provided
him with large stores of foodstuffs, clothes, and so forth, for
distribution among the wandering monks.

Sri Ramakrishna had not read books, yet he possessed an encyclopaedic
knowledge of religions and religious philosophies. This he acquired from
his contacts with innumerable holy men and scholars. He had a unique
power of assimilation; through meditation he made this knowledge a part
of his being. Once, when he was asked by a disciple about the source of
his seemingly inexhaustible knowledge, he replied: \"I have not read;
but I have heard the learned. I have made a garland of their knowledge,
wearing it round my neck, and I have given it as an offering at the feet
of the Mother.\"

Sri Ramakrishna used to say that when the flower blooms the bees come to
it for honey of their own accord. Now many souls began to visit
Dakshineśwar to satisfy their spiritual hunger. He, the devotee and
aspirant, became the Master. Gauri, the great scholar who had been one
of the first to proclaim Sri Ramakrishna an Incarnation of God, paid the
Master a visit in 1870 and with the Master\'s blessings renounced the
world. Nārāyan Śāstri, another great pundit, who had mastered the six
systems of Hindu philosophy and had been offered a lucrative post by the
Maharaja of Jaipur, met the Master and recognized in him one who had
realized in life those ideals which he himself had encountered merely in
books. Sri Ramakrishna initiated Nārāyan Śastri, at his earnest request,
into the life of sannyās. Pundit Padmalochan, the court pundit of the
Maharaja of Burdwan, well known for his scholarship in both the Vedānta
and the *Nyāya* systems of philosophy, accepted the Master as an
Incarnation of God. Krishnakishore, a Vedantist scholar, became devoted
to the Master. And there arrived Viśwanāth Upādhyāya, who was to become
a favourite devotee; Sri Ramakrishna always addressed him as
\"Captain\". He was a high officer of the King of Nepal and had received
the title of Colonel in recognition of his merit. A scholar of the Gita,
the Bhāgavata, and the Vedānta philosophy, he daily performed the
worship of his Chosen Deity with great devotion. \"I have read the Vedas
and the other scriptures\", he said. \"I have also met a good many monks
and devotees in different places. But it is in Sri Ramakrishna\'s
presence that my spiritual yearnings have been fulfilled. To me he seems
to be the embodiment of the truths of the

scriptures.\"

The Knowledge of Brahman in nirvikalpa Samādhi had convinced Sri
Ramakrishna that the gods of the different religions are but so many
readings of the Absolute, and that the Ultimate Reality could never be
expressed by human tongue. He understood that all religions lead their
devotees by differing paths to one and the same goal. Now he became
eager to explore some of the alien religions; for with him understanding
meant actual experience.

**Islām**

Toward the end of 1866 he began to practise the disciplines of Islām.
Under the direction of his Mussalman guru he abandoned himself to his
new sādhana. He dressed as a Mussalman and repeated the name of Allah.

His prayers took the form of the Islamic devotions. He forgot the Hindu
gods and goddesses - even Kāli - and gave up visiting the temples. He
took up his residence outside the temple precincts. After three days he
saw the vision of a radiant figure, perhaps Mohammed. This figure gently
approached him and finally lost himself in Sri Ramakrishna. Thus he
realized the Mussalman God. Thence he passed into communion with
Brahman. The mighty river of Islam also led him back to the Ocean of the
Absolute.

**Christianity**

Eight years later, some time in November 1874, Sri Ramakrishna was
seized with an irresistible desire to learn the truth of the Christian
religion. He began to listen to readings from the Bible, by Śambhu
Charan Mallick, a gentleman of Calcutta and a devotee of the Master. Sri
Ramakrishna became fascinated by the life and teachings of Jesus. One
day he was seated in the parlour of Jadu Mallick\'s garden house at
Dakshineśwar, when his eyes became fixed on a painting of the Madonna
and Child. Intently watching it, he became gradually overwhelmed with
divine emotion. The figures in the picture took on life, and the rays of
light emanating from them entered his soul. The effect of this
experience was stronger than that of the vision of Mohammed. In dismay
he cried out, \"O Mother! What are You doing to me?\" And, breaking
through the barriers of creed and religion, he entered a new realm of
ecstasy. Christ possessed his soul. For three days he did not set foot
in the Kāli temple. On the fourth day, in the afternoon, as he was
walking in the Panchavati, he saw coming toward him a person with
beautiful large eyes, serene countenance, and fair skin. As the two
faced each other, a voice rang out in the depths of Sri Ramakrishna\'s
soul: \"Behold the Christ who shed His heart\'s blood for the redemption
of the world, who suffered a sea of anguish for love of men. It is He,
the Master Yogi, who is in eternal union with God. It is Jesus, Love
Incarnate.\" The Son of Man embraced the Son of the Divine Mother and
merged in him. Sri Ramakrishna realized his identity with Christ, as he
had already realized his identity with Kāli, Rāmā, Hanuman, Rādhā,
Krishna, Brahman, and Mohammed. The Master went into Samādhi and
communed with the Brahman with attributes. Thus he experienced the truth
that Christianity, too, was a path leading to God-Consciousness. Till
the last moment of his life he believed that Christ was an Incarnation
of God. But Christ, for him, was not the only Incarnation; there were
others - Buddha, for instance, and Krishna.

**Attitude toward Different Religions**

Sri Ramakrishna accepted the divinity of Buddha and used to point out
the similarity of his teachings to those of the Upanishads. He also
showed great respect for the Tirthankarās, who founded Jainism, and for
the ten Gurus of Sikhism. But he did not speak of them as Divine
Incarnations. He was heard to say that the Gurus of Sikhism were the
reincarnations of King Janaka of ancient India. He kept in his room at
Dakshineśwar a small statue of Tirthankara Mahāvira and a picture of
Christ, before which incense was burnt morning and evening.

Without being formally initiated into their doctrines, Sri Ramakrishna
thus realized the ideals of religions other than Hinduism. He did not
need to follow any doctrine. All barriers were removed by his
overwhelming love of God. So he became a Master who could speak with
authority regarding the ideas and ideals of the various religions of the
world. \"I have practised\", said he, \"all religions - Hinduism, Islam,
Christianity - and I have also followed the paths of the different Hindu
sects. I have found that it is the same God toward whom all are
directing their steps, though along different paths. You must try all
beliefs and traverse all the different ways once. Wherever I look, I see
men quarrelling in the name of religion - Hindus, Mohammedans, Brahmos,

Vaishnavās, and the rest. But they never reflect that He who is called
Krishna is also called Śiva, and bears the

name of the Primal Energy, Jesus, and Allah as well - the same Rāmā with
a thousand names. A lake has several G*hāts*. At one, the Hindus take
water in pitchers and call it *\'Jal\'*; at another the Mussalmans take
water in leather bags and call it *\'pāni\'*. At a third the Christians
call it *\'water\'*. Can we imagine that it is not \'jal\', but

only \'pāni\' or \'water\'? How ridiculous! The substance is One under
different names, and everyone is seeking the same substance; only
climate, temperament, and name create differences. Let each man follow
his own path. If he sincerely and ardently wishes to know God, peace be
unto him! He will surely realize Him.\"

In 1867, Sri Ramakrishna returned to Kāmārpukur to recuperate from the
effect of his austerities. The peaceful countryside, the simple and
artless companions of his boyhood, and the pure air did him much good.
The villagers were happy to get back their playful, frank, witty,
kind-hearted, and truthful Gadādhar, though they did not fail to notice
the great change that had come over him during his years in Calcutta.
His wife, Sāradā Devi, now fourteen years old, soon arrived at
Kāmārpukur. Her spiritual development was much beyond her age and she
was able to understand immediately her husband\'s state of mind. She
became eager to learn from him about God and to live with him as his
attendant. The Master accepted her cheerfully both as his disciple and
as his spiritual companion. Referring to the experiences of these few
days, she once said: \"I used to feel always as if a pitcher full of
bliss were placed in my heart. The joy was indescribable.\"

**Pilgrimage**

On January 27, 1868, Mathur Bābu with a party of some one hundred and
twenty-five persons set out on a pilgrimage to the sacred places of
northern India. At Vaidyanāth in Behar, when the Master saw the
inhabitants of a village reduced by poverty and starvation to mere
skeletons, he requested his rich patron to feed the people and give each
a piece of cloth. Mathur demurred at the added expense. The Master
declared bitterly that he would not go on to Banāras, but would live
with the poor and share their miseries. He actually left Mathur and sat
down with the villagers.

Whereupon Mathur had to yield. On another occasion, two years later, Sri
Ramakrishna showed a similar sentiment for the poor and needy. He
accompanied Mathur on a tour to one of the latter\'s estates at the time
of the collection of rents. For two years the harvests had failed and
the tenants were in a state of extreme poverty. The Master asked Mathur
to remit their rents, distribute help to them, and in addition give the
hungry people a sumptuous feast. When Mathur grumbled, the Master said:
\"You are only the steward of the Divine Mother. They are the Mother\'s
tenants. You must spend the Mother\'s money. When they are suffering,
how can you refuse to help them? You must help them.\" Again Mathur had
to give in. Sri Ramakrishna\'s sympathy for the poor sprang from his
perception of God in all created beings. His sentiment was not that of
the humanist or philanthropist. To him the service of man was the same
as the worship of God.

The party entered holy Banāras by boat along the Ganges. When Sri
Ramakrishna\'s eyes fell on this city of Śiva, where had accumulated for
ages the devotion and piety of countless worshippers, he saw it to be
made of gold, as the scriptures declare. He was visibly moved. During
his stay in the city he treated every particle of its earth with utmost
respect. At the Manikarnikā Ghāt, the great cremation ground of the
city, he actually saw Śiva, with ash-covered body and tawny matted hair,
serenely approaching each funeral pyre and breathing into the ears of
the corpses the mantra of liberation; and then the Divine Mother
removing from the dead their bonds. Thus he realized the significance of
the scriptural statement that anyone dying in Banāras attains salvation
through the grace of Śiva. He paid a visit to Trailanga Swāmi, the
celebrated monk, whom he later declared to be a real paramahamsa, a
veritable image of Śiva.

Sri Ramakrishna visited Allahābad, at the confluence of the Ganges and
the Jamuna, and then proceeded to Vrindāvan and Mathura, hallowed by the
legends, songs, and dramas about Krishna and the gopis. Here he had
numerous visions and his heart overflowed with divine emotion. He wept
and said: \"O Krishna! Everything here is as it was in the olden days.
You alone are absent.\" He visited the great woman saint Gangāmāyi,
regarded by Vaishnava devotees as the reincarnation of an intimate
attendant of Rādhā. She was sixty years old and had frequent trances.
She spoke of Sri Ramakrishna as an incarnation of Rādhā. With great
difficulty he was persuaded to leave her.

On the return journey Mathur wanted to visit Gayā, but Sri Ramakrishna
declined to go. He recalled his father\'s vision at Gayā before his own
birth and felt that in the temple of Vishnu he would become permanently
absorbed in God. Mathur, honouring the Master\'s wish, returned with his
party to Calcutta.

From Vrindāvan the Master had brought a handful of dust. Part of this he
scattered in the Panchavati; the rest he buried in the little hut where
he had practised meditation. \"Now this place\", he said, \"is as sacred
as Vrindāvan.\"

In 1870 the Master went on a pilgrimage to Nadia, the birth-place of Sri
Chaitanya. As the boat by which he travelled approached the sand-bank
close to Nadia, Sri Ramakrishna had a vision of the \"two brothers\",
Sri Chaitanya and his companion Nityānanda, \"bright as molten gold\"
and with haloes, rushing to greet him with uplifted hands. \"There they
come! There they come!\" he cried. They entered his body and he went
into a deep trance.

**Relation with His Wife**

In 1872, Sāradā Devi paid her first visit to her husband at
Dakshineśwar. Four years earlier she had seen him at Kāmārpukur and had
tasted the bliss of his divine company. Since then she had become even
more gentle, tender, introspective, serious, and unselfish. She had
heard many rumours about her husband\'s insanity. People had shown her
pity in her misfortune. The more she thought, the more she felt that her
duty was to be with him, giving him, in whatever measure she could, a
wife\'s devoted service. She was now eighteen years old. Accompanied by
her father, she arrived at Dakshineśwar, having come on foot the
distance of eighty miles. She had had an attack of fever on the way.
When she arrived at the temple garden the Master said sorrowfully: \"Ah!
You have come too late. My Mathur is no longer here to look after you.\"
Mathur had passed away the previous year.

The Master took up the duty of instructing his young wife, and this
included everything from housekeeping to the Knowledge of Brahman. He
taught her how to trim a lamp, how to behave toward people according to
their differing temperaments, and how to conduct herself before
visitors. He instructed her in the mysteries of spiritual life - prayer,
meditation, japa, deep contemplation, and Samādhi. The first lesson that
Sāradā Devi received was: \"God is everybody\'s Beloved, just as the
moon is dear to every child. Everyone has the same right to pray to Him.
Out of His grace He reveals Himself to all who call upon Him. You too
will see Him if you but pray to Him.\"

Totāpuri, coming to know of the Master\'s marriage, had once remarked:
\"What does it matter? He alone is firmly established in the Knowledge
of Brahman who can adhere to his spirit of discrimination and
renunciation even while living with his wife. He alone has attained the
supreme illumination who can look on man and woman alike as Brahman. A
man with the idea of sex may be a good aspirant, but he is still far
from the goal.\" Sri Ramakrishna and his wife lived together at
Dakshineśwar, but their minds always soared above the worldly plane. A
few months after Sāradā Devi\'s arrival Sri Ramakrishna arranged, on an
auspicious day, a special worship of Kāli, the Divine Mother. Instead of
an image of the Deity, he placed on the seat the living image, Sāradā
Devi herself. The worshipper and the worshipped went into deep Samādhi
and in the transcendental plane their souls were united. After several
hours Sri Ramakrishna came down again to the relative plane, sang a hymn
to the Great Goddess, and surrendered, at the feet of the living image,
himself, his rosary, and the fruit of his life-long sādhana. This is
known in Tantra as the *Shodasi Puja,* the \"Adoration of Woman\". Sri
Ramakrishna realized the significance of the great statement of the
Upanishad: \"O Lord, Thou art the woman, Thou art the man; Thou art the
boy, Thou art the girl; Thou art the old, tottering on their crutches.
Thou pervadest the universe in its multiple forms.\"

By his marriage Sri Ramakrishna admitted the great value of marriage in
man\'s spiritual evolution, and by adhering to his monastic vows he
demonstrated the imperative necessity of self-control, purity, and
continence, in the realization of God. By his unique spiritual
relationship with his wife he proved that husband and wife can live
together as spiritual companions. Thus his life is a synthesis of the
ways of life of the householder and the

monk.

**The \"Ego\" of the Master**

In the nirvikalpa Samādhi Sri Ramakrishna had realized that Brahman
alone is real and the world illusory. By

keeping his mind six months on the plane of the non-dual Brahman, he had
attained to the state of the *Vijnani,* the Knower of Truth in a special
and very rich sense, who sees Brahman not only in himself and in the

transcendental Absolute, but in everything of the world. In this state
of *Vijnāna,* sometimes, bereft of body-consciousness, he would regard
himself as one with Brahman; sometimes, conscious of the dual world, he
would regard himself as God\'s devotee, servant, or child. In order to
enable the Master to work for the welfare of humanity, the Divine Mother
had kept in him a trace of ego, which he described - according to his
mood - as the \"ego of Knowledge\", the \"ego of Devotion\", the \"ego
of a child\", or the \"ego of a servant\". In any case this ego of the
Master, consumed by the fire of the Knowledge of Brahman, was an
appearance only, like a burnt string. He often referred to this ego as
the \"ripe ego\" in contrast with the ego of the bound soul, which he
described as the \"unripe\" or \"green\" ego. The ego of the bound soul
identifies itself with the body, relatives, possessions, and the world;
but the \"ripe ego\", illumined by Divine Knowledge, knows the body,
relatives, possessions, and the world to be unreal and establishes a
relationship of love with God alone. Through this \"ripe ego\" Sri
Ramakrishna dealt with the world and his wife. One day, while stroking
his feet, Sāradā Devi asked the Master, \"What do you think of me?\"
Quick came the answer: \"The Mother who is worshipped in the temple is
the mother who has given birth to my body and is now living in the
Nahabat, and it is She again who is stroking my feet at this moment.
Indeed, I always look on you as the personification of the Blissful
Mother Kāli.\"

Sāradā Devi, in the company of her husband, had rare spiritual
experiences. She said: \"I have no words to describe my wonderful
exaltation of spirit as I watched him in his different moods. Under the
influence of divine emotion he would sometimes talk on abstruse
subjects, sometimes laugh, sometimes weep, and sometimes become
perfectly motionless in Samādhi. This would continue throughout the
night. There was such an extraordinary divine presence in him that now
and then I would shake with fear and wonder how the night would pass.
Months went by in this way. Then one day he discovered that I had to
keep awake the whole night lest, during my sleep, he should go into
Samādhi - for it might happen at any moment -, and so he asked me to
sleep in the Nahabat.\"

**Summary of the Master\'s Spiritual Experiences**

We have now come to the end of Sri Ramakrishna\'s sādhana, the period of
his spiritual discipline. As a result of his supersensuous experiences
he reached certain conclusions regarding himself and spirituality in
general. His conclusions about himself may be summarised as follows:

First, he was an Incarnation of God, a specially commissioned person,
whose spiritual experiences were for the benefit of humanity. Whereas it
takes an ordinary man a whole life\'s struggle to realize one or two
phases of God, he had in a few years realized God in all His phases.

Second, he knew that he had always been a free soul, that the various
disciplines through which he had passed were really not necessary for
his own liberation but were solely for the benefit of others. Thus the
terms liberation and bondage were not applicable to him. As long as
there are beings who consider themselves bound, God must come down to
earth as an Incarnation to free them from bondage, just as a magistrate
must visit any part of his district in which there is trouble.

Third, he came to foresee the time of his death. His words with respect
to this matter were literally fulfilled.

**About spirituality in general the following were his conclusions :**

First, he was firmly convinced that all religions are true, that every
doctrinal system represents a path to God. He had followed all the main
paths and all had led him to the same goal. He was the first religious
prophet recorded in history to preach the harmony of religions.

Second, the three great systems of thought known as Dualism, Qualified
Non-dualism, and Absolute Non-dualism *- Dvaita, Visishtādvaita, and
Advaita -* he perceived to represent three stages in man\'s progress
toward

the Ultimate Reality. They were not contradictory but complementary and
suited to different temperaments. For the ordinary man with strong
attachment to the senses, a dualistic form of religion, prescribing a
certain amount of material support, such as music and other symbols, is
useful. A man of God-realization transcends the idea of worldly duties,
but the ordinary mortal must perform his duties, striving to be
unattached and to surrender the results to God. The mind can comprehend
and describe the range of thought and experience up to the
Viśiśtādvaita, and no further. The Advaita, the last word in spiritual
experience, is something to be felt in Samādhi, for it transcends mind
and speech. From the highest standpoint, the Absolute and Its
manifestation are equally real - the Lord\'s Name, His Abode, and the
Lord Himself are of the same spiritual Essence. Everything is Spirit,
the difference being only in form.

Third, Sri Ramakrishna realized the wish of the Divine Mother that
through him She should found a new Order, consisting of those who would
uphold the universal doctrines illustrated in his life.

Fourth, his spiritual insight told him that those who were having their
last birth on the mortal plane of existence and those who had sincerely
called on the Lord even once in their lives must come to him.

During this period Sri Ramakrishna suffered several bereavements. The
first was the death of a nephew named, Akshay. After the young man\'s
death Sri Ramakrishna said: \"Akshay died before my very eyes. But it
did not affect me in the least. I stood by and watched a man die. It was
like a sword being drawn from its scabbard. I enjoyed the scene, and
laughed and sang and danced over it. They removed the body and cremated
it. But the next day as I stood there (pointing to the southeast
verandah of his room), I felt a racking pain for the loss of Akshay, as
if somebody were squeezing my heart like a wet towel. I wondered at it
and thought that the Mother was teaching me a lesson. I was not much
concerned even with my own body - much less with a relative. But if such
was my pain at the loss of a nephew, how much more must be the grief of
the householders at the loss of their near and dear ones!\" In 1871
Mathur died, and some five years later Śambhu Mallick - who, after
Mathur\'s passing away, had taken care of the Master\'s comfort. In 1873
died his elder brother Rāmeśwar, and in 1876, his beloved mother. These
bereavements left their imprint on the tender human heart of Sri
Ramakrishna albeit he had realized the immortality of the soul and the
illusoriness of birth and death.

In March 1875, about a year before the death of his mother, the Master
met Keshab Chandra Sen. The meeting was a momentous event for both Sri
Ramakrishna and Keshab. Here the Master for the first time came into
actual contact with a worthy representative of modern India.

**Brāhmo Samāj**

Keshab was the leader of the Brāhmo Samāj, one of the two great
movements that, during the latter part of the nineteenth century, played
an important part in shaping the course of the renascence of India. The
founder of the Brāhmo movement had been the great Rājā Rāmmohan Roy
(1774-1833). Though born in an orthodox brāhmin family, Rāmmohan Roy had
shown great sympathy for Islam and Christianity. He had gone to Tibet in
search of the Buddhist mysteries. He had extracted from Christianity its
ethical system, but had rejected the divinity of Christ as he had denied
the Hindu Incarnations. The religion of Islam influenced him, to a great
extent, in the formulation of his monotheistic doctrines. But he always
went back to the Vedas for his spiritual inspiration. The Brāhmo Samāj,
which he founded in 1828, was dedicated to the \"worship and adoration
of the Eternal, the Unsearchable, the Immutable Being, who is the Author
and Preserver of the Universe\". The Samāj was open to all without
distinction of colour, creed, caste, nation, or religion.

The real organizer of the Samāj was Devendranāth Tāgore (1817-1905), the
father of the poet Rabindranāth. His physical and spiritual beauty,
aristocratic aloofness, penetrating intellect, and poetic sensibility
made him the foremost leader of the educated Bengālis. These addressed
him by the respectful epithet of *Maharshi,* the \"Great Seer\". The
Maharshi was a Sanskrit scholar and, unlike Rājā Rāmmohan Roy, drew his
inspiration entirely from the Upanishads. He was an implacable enemy of
image worship and also fought to stop the

infiltration of Christian ideas into the Samāj. He gave the movement its
faith and ritual. Under his influence the Brāhmo Samāj professed One
Self-existent Supreme Being who had created the universe out of nothing,
the God of Truth, Infinite Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, the Eternal and
Omnipotent, the One without a Second. Man should love Him and do His
will, believe in Him and worship Him, and thus merit salvation in the
world to come.

By far the ablest leader of the Brāhmo movement was Keshab Chandra Sen
(1838-1884). Unlike Rājā Rāmmohan Roy and Devendranāth Tāgore, Keshab
was born of a middle-class Bengāli family and had been brought up in an
English school. He did not know Sanskrit and very soon broke away from
the popular Hindu religion. Even at an early age he came under the spell
of Christ and professed to have experienced the special favour of John
the Baptist, Christ, and St. Paul. When he strove to introduce Christ to
the Brāhmo Samāj, a rupture became inevitable with Devendranāth. In 1868
Keshab broke with the older leader and founded the Brāhmo Samāj of
India, Devendra retaining leadership of the first Brāhmo Samāj, now
called the Ādi Samāj.

Keshab possessed a complex nature. When passing through a great moral
crisis, he spent much of his time in solitude and felt that he heard the
voice of God. When a devotional form of worship was introduced into the
Brāhmo Samāj, he spent hours in singing kirtan with his followers. He
visited England in 1870 and impressed the English people with his
musical voice, his simple English, and his spiritual fervour. He was
entertained by Queen Victoria. Returning to India, he founded centres of
the Brāhmo Samāj in various parts of the country. Not unlike a professor
of comparative religion in a European university, he began to discover,
about the time of his first contact with Sri Ramakrishna, the harmony of
religions. He became sympathetic toward the Hindu gods and goddesses,
explaining them in a liberal fashion. Further, he believed that he was
called by God to dictate to the world God\'s newly revealed law, the New
Dispensation, the **Nava-vidhān.**

In 1878 a schism divided Keshab\'s Samāj. Some of his influential
followers accused him of infringing the Brāhmo principles by marrying
his daughter to a wealthy man before she had attained the marriageable
age approved by the Samāj. This group seceded and established the
Sādhāran Brāhmo Samāj, Keshab remaining the leader of the Navavidhān.
Keshab now began to be drawn more and more toward the Christ ideal,
though under the influence of Sri Ramakrishna his devotion to the Divine
Mother also deepened. His mental oscillation between Christ and the
Divine Mother of Hinduism found no position of rest. In Bengāl and some
other parts of India the Brāhmo movement took the form of Unitarian
Christianity, scoffed at Hindu rituals, and preached a crusade against
image worship. Influenced by Western culture, it declared the supremacy
of reason, advocated the ideals of the French Revolution, abolished the
caste-system among, its own members, stood for the emancipation of
women, agitate for the abolition of early marriage, sanctioned the
remarriage of widows, and encouraged various educational and
social-reform movements. The immediate effect of the Brāhmo movement in
Bengāl was the checking of the proselytising activities of the Christian
missionaries. It also raised Indian culture in the estimation of its
English masters. But it was an intellectual and eclectic religious
ferment born of the necessity of the time. Unlike Hinduism, it was not
founded on the deep inner experiences of sages and prophets. Its
influence was confined to a comparatively few educated men and women of
the country, and the vast masses of the Hindus remained outside it. It
sounded monotonously only one of the notes in the rich gamut of the
Eternal Religion of the Hindus.

1.  **rya Samāj**

The other movement playing an important part in the nineteenth-century
religious revival of India was the Ārya Samāj. The Brāhmo Samāj,
essentially a movement of compromise with European culture, tacitly
admitted the superiority of the West. But the founder of the Ārya Samāj
was a pugnacious Hindu sannyāsi who accepted the challenge of Islam and
Christianity and was resolved to combat all foreign influence in India.
Swāmi Dayānanda (1824-1883) launched this movement in Bombay in 1875,
and soon its influence was felt throughout western India. The Swāmi was
a great scholar of the Vedas, which he explained as being strictly
mono-theistic. He preached against the worship of images and
re-established the ancient Vedic sacrificial rites. According to him the
Vedas were the ultimate authority on religion, and he accepted every
word of them as literally true. The Ārya Samāj became a bulwark against
the encroachments of Islam and Christianity, and its orthodox flavour
appealed to many Hindu minds. It also assumed leadership in many
movements of social

reform. The caste-system became a target of its attack. Women it
liberated from many of their social disabilities. The cause of education
received from it a great impetus. It started agitation against early
marriage and advocated the remarriage of Hindu widows. Its influence was
strongest in the Punjab, the battle-ground of the Hindu and Islamic
cultures. A new fighting attitude was introduced into the slumbering
Hindu society. Unlike the Brāhmo Samāj, the influence of the Ārya Samāj
was not confined to the intellectuals. It was a force that spread to the
masses. It was a dogmatic movement intolerant of those disagreed with
its views, and it emphasized only one way, the Ārya Samāj way, to the
realization of Truth. Sri Ramakrishna met Swāmi Dayānanda when the
latter visited Bengāl.

**Keshab Chandra Sen**

Keshab Chandra Sen and Sri Ramakrishna met for the first time in the
garden house of Jaygopāl Sen at Belgharia, a few miles from
Dakshineśwar, where the great Brāhmo leader was staying with some of his
disciples. In many respects the two were poles apart, though an
irresistible inner attraction was to make them intimate friends. The
Master had realized God as Pure Spirit and Consciousness, but he
believed in the various forms of God as well. Keshab, on the other hand,
regarded image worship as idolatry and gave allegorical explanations of
the Hindu deities. Keshab was an orator and a writer of books and
magazine articles; Sri Ramakrishna had a horror of lecturing and hardly
knew how to write his own name. Keshab\'s fame spread far and wide, even
reaching the distant shores of England; the Master still led a secluded
life in the village of Dakshineśwar. Keshab emphasized social reforms
for India\'s regeneration; to Sri Ramakrishna God-realization was the
only goal of life. Keshab considered himself a disciple of Christ and
accepted in a diluted form the Christian sacraments and Trinity; Sri
Ramakrishna was the simple child of Kāli, the Divine Mother, though he
too, in a different way, acknowledged Christ\'s divinity. Keshab was a
house-holder and took a real interest in the welfare of his children,
whereas Sri Ramakrishna was a paramahamsa and completely indifferent to
the life of the world. Yet, as their acquaintance ripened into
friendship, Sri Ramakrishna and Keshab held each other in great love and
respect. Years later, at the news of Keshab\'s death, the Master felt as
if half his body had become paralysed. Keshab\'s concepts of the harmony
of religions and the Motherhood of God were deepened and enriched by his
contact with Sri Ramakrishna.

Sri Ramakrishna, dressed in a red-bordered dhoti, one end of which was
carelessly thrown over his left shoulder, came to Jaygopal\'s garden
house accompanied by Hriday. No one took notice of the unostentatious
visitor. Finally the Master said to Keshab, \"People tell me you have
seen God; so I have come to hear from you about God.\" A magnificent
conversation followed. The Master sang a thrilling song about Kāli and
forthwith went into Samādhi. When Hriday uttered the sacred \"Om\" in
his ears, he gradually came back to consciousness of the world, his face
still radiating a divine brilliance. Keshab and his followers were
amazed. The contrast between Sri Ramakrishna and the Brāhmo devotees was
very interesting. There sat this small man, thin and extremely delicate.
His eyes were illumined with an inner light. Good humour gleamed in his
eyes and lurked in the corners of his mouth. His speech was Bengāli of a
homely kind with a slight, delightful stammer, and his words held men
enthralled by their wealth of spiritual experience, their inexhaustible
store of simile and metaphor, their power of observation, their bright
and subtle humour, their wonderful catholicity, their ceaseless flow of
wisdom. And around him now were the sophisticated men of Bengāl, the
best products of Western education, with Keshab, the idol of young
Bengāl, as their leader.

Keshab\'s sincerity was enough for Sri Ramakrishna. Henceforth the two
saw each other frequently, either at Dakshineśwar or at the temple of
the Brāhmo Samāj. Whenever the Master was in the temple at the time of
divine service, Keshab would request him to speak to the congregation.
And Keshab would visit the saint, in his turn, with offerings of flowers
and fruits.

**Other Brāhmo Leaders**

Gradually other Brāhmo leaders began to feel Sri Ramakrishna\'s
influence. But they were by no means uncritical admirers of the Master.
They particularly disapproved of his ascetic renunciation and
condemnation of, \"woman and gold\".7 They measured him according to
their own ideals of the householder\'s life. Some could not understand
his Samādhi and described it as a nervous malady. Yet they could not
resist his magnetic

personality.

Among the Brāhmo leaders who knew the Master closely were Pratāp Chandra
Mazumdār, Vijay Krishna Goswāmi, Trailokyanāth Sannyāl and Śivanāth
Śastri.

Śivanāth, one day, was greatly impressed by the Master\'s utter
simplicity and abhorrence of praise. He was seated with Sri Ramakrishna
in the latter\'s room when several rich men of Calcutta arrived. The
Master left the room for a few minutes. In the mean time Hriday, his
nephew, began to describe his Samādhi to the visitors. The last few
words caught the Master\'s ear as he entered the room. He said to
Hriday: \"What a mean-spirited fellow you must be to extol me thus
before these rich men! You have seen their costly apparel and their gold
watches and chains, and your object is to get from them as much money as
you can. What do I care about what they think of me? (Turning to the
gentlemen) No, my friends, what he has told you about me is not true. It
was not love of God that made me absorbed in God and indifferent to
external life. I became positively insane for some time. The *sādhus*
who frequented this temple told me to practise many things. I tried to
follow them, and the consequence was that my austerities drove me to
insanity.\" This is a quotation from one of Śivanāth\'s books. He took
the Master\'s words literally and failed to see their real import.

Śivanāth vehemently criticized the Master for his other-worldly attitude
toward his wife. He writes: \"Ramakrishna was practically separated from
his wife, who lived in her village home. One day when I was complaining
to some friends about the virtual widowhood of his wife, he drew me to
one side and whispered in my ear: \'Why do you complain? It is no longer
possible; it is all dead and gone.\' Another day as I was inveighing
against this part of his teaching, and also declaring that our program
of work in the Brāhmo Samāj includes women, that ours is a social and
domestic religion, and that we want to give education and social liberty
to women, the saint became very much excited, as was his way when
anything against his settled conviction was asserted - a trait we so
much liked in him - and exclaimed, \'Go, thou fool, go and perish in the
pit that your women will dig for you.\' Then he glared at me and said:
\'What does a gardener do with a young plant? Does he not surround it
with a fence, to protect it from goats and cattle? And when the young
plant has grown up into a tree and it can no longer be injured by
cattle, does he not remove the fence and let the tree grow freely?\' I
replied, \'Yes, that is the custom with gardeners.\' Then he remarked,
\'Do the same in your spiritual life; become strong, be full-grown; then
you may seek them.\' To which I replied, \'I don\'t agree with you in
thinking that women\'s work is like that of cattle, destructive; they
are our associates and helpers in our spiritual struggles and social
progress\' - a view with which he could not agree, and he marked his
dissent by shaking his head. Then referring to the lateness of the hour
he jocularly remarked, \'It is time for you to depart; take care, do not
be late; otherwise your woman will not admit you into her room.\' This
evoked hearty laughter.\"

Pratāp Chandra Mazumdār, the right-hand man of Keshab and an
accomplished Brāhmo preacher in Europe and America, bitterly criticized
Sri Ramakrishna\'s use of uncultured language and also his austere
attitude toward his wife. But he could not escape the spell of the
Master\'s personality. In the course of an article about Sri
Ramakrishna, Pratāp wrote in the \"Theistic Quarterly Review\": \"What
is there in common between him and me? I, a Europeanized, civilized,
self-centered, semi-sceptical, so-called educated reasoner, and he, a
poor, illiterate, unpolished, half-idolatrous, friendless Hindu devotee?
Why should I sit long hours to attend to him, I, who have listened to
Disraeli and Fawcett, Stanley and Max Muller, and a whole host of
European scholars and divines? ... And it is not I only, but dozens like
me, who do the same. ... He worships Śiva, he worships Kāli, he worships
Rāmā, he worships Krishna, and is a confirmed advocate of Vedāntic
doctrines. ... He is an idolater, yet is a faithful and most devoted
Meditator on the perfections of the One Formless, Absolute, Infinite
Deity. ... His religion is ecstasy, his worship means transcendental
insight, his whole nature burns day and night with a permanent fire and
fever of a strange faith and feeling. ... So long as he is spared to us,
gladly shall we sit at his feet to learn from him the sublime precepts
of purity, unworldliness, spirituality, and inebriation in the love of
God. ... He, by his childlike bhakti, by his strong conceptions of an
ever-ready Motherhood, helped to unfold it \[God as our Mother\] in our
minds wonderfully. ... By associating with him we learnt to realize
better the divine attributes as scattered over the three hundred and
thirty millions of deities of mythological India, the

gods of the Purānās.\"

The Brāhmo leaders received much inspiration from their contact with Sri
Ramakrishna. It broadened their religious views and kindled in their
hearts the yearning for God-realization; it made them understand and
appreciate the rituals and symbols of Hindu religion, convinced them of
the manifestation of God in diverse forms, and deepened their thoughts
about the harmony of religions. The Master, too, was impressed by the
sincerity of many of the, Brāhmo devotees. He told them about his own
realizations and explained to them the essence of his teachings, such as
the necessity of renunciation, sincerity in the pursuit of one\'s own
course of discipline, faith in God, the performance of one\'s duties
without thought of results, and discrimination between the Real and the
unreal.

This contact with the educated and progressive Bengālis opened Sri
Ramakrishna\'s eyes to a new realm of thought. Born and brought up in a
simple village, without any formal education, and taught by the orthodox
holy men of India in religious life, he had had no opportunity to study
the influence of modernism on the thoughts and lives of the Hindus. He
could not properly estimate the result of the impact of Western
education on Indian culture. He was a Hindu of the Hindus, renunciation
being to him the only means to the realization of God in life. From the
Brahmos he learnt that the new generation of India made a compromise
between God and the world. Educated young men were influenced more by
the Western philosophers than by their own prophets. But Sri Ramakrishna
was not dismayed, for he saw in this, too, the hand of God. And though
he expounded to the Brahmos all his ideas about God and austere
religious disciplines, yet he bade them accept from his teachings only
as much as suited their tastes and temperaments.

**The Master\'s Yearning for His Own Devotees**

Contact with the Brahmos increased Sri Ramakrishna\'s longing to
encounter aspirants who would be able to follow his teachings in their
purest form. \"There was no limit\", he once declared, \"to the longing
I felt at that time. During the day-time I somehow managed to control
it. The secular talk of the worldly-minded was galling to me, and I
would look wistfully to the day when my own beloved companions would
come. I hoped to find solace in conversing with them and relating to
them my own realizations. Every little incident would remind me of them,
and thoughts of them wholly engrossed me. I was already arranging in my
mind what I should say to one and give to another, and so on. But when
the day would come to a close I would not be able to curb my feelings.
The thought that another day had gone by, and they had not come,
oppressed me. When, during the evening service, the temples rang with
the sound of bells and conch-shells, I would climb to the roof of the
*Kuthi* in the garden and, writhing in anguish of heart, cry at the top
of my voice: \'Come, my children! Oh, where are you? I cannot bear to
live without you.\' A mother never longed so intensely for the sight of
her child, nor a friend for his companions, nor a lover for his
sweetheart, as I longed for them. Oh, it was indescribable! Shortly
after this period of yearning the devotees began to come.\"

In the year 1879 occasional writings about Sri Ramakrishna by the
Brahmos, in the Brāhmo magazines, began to attract his future disciples
from the educated middle-class Bengālis, and they continued to come till
1884. But others, too, came, feeling the subtle power of his attraction.
They were an ever shifting crowd of people of all castes and creeds:
Hindus and Brahmos, Vaishnavas and Śāktās, the educated with university
degrees and the illiterate, old and young, maharajas and beggars,
journalists and artists, pundits and devotees, philosophers and the
worldly-minded, jnānis and yogis, men of action and men of faith,
virtuous women and prostitutes, office-holders and vagabonds,
philanthropists and self-seekers, dramatists and drunkards, builders-up
and pullers-down. He gave to them all, without stint, from his
illimitable store of realization. No one went away empty-handed. He
taught them the lofty knowledge of the Vedānta and the soul-melting love
of the Purānā. Twenty hours out of twenty-four he would speak without
rest or respite. He gave to all his sympathy and enlightenment, and he
touched them with that strange power of the soul which could not but
melt even the most hardened. And people understood him according to
their powers of comprehension.

**The Master\'s Method of Teaching**

But he remained as ever the willing instrument in the hand of God, the
child of the Divine Mother, totally untouched by the idea of being a
teacher. He used to say that three ideas - that he was a guru, a father,
and

a master - pricked his flesh like thorns. Yet he was an extraordinary
teacher. He stirred his disciples\' hearts more by a subtle influence
than by actions or words. He never claimed to be the founder of a
religion or the organizer of a sect. Yet he was a religious dynamo. He
was the verifier of all religions and creeds. He was like an expert
gardener, who prepares the soil and removes the weeds, knowing that the
plants will grow because of the inherent power of the seeds, producing
each its appropriate flowers and fruits. He never thrust his ideas on
anybody. He understood people\'s limitations and worked on the principle
that what is good for one may be bad for another. He had the unusual
power of knowing the devotees\' minds, even their inmost souls, at the
first sight. He accepted disciples with the full knowledge of their past
tendencies and future possibilities. The life of evil did not frighten
him, nor did religious squeamishness raise anybody in his estimation. He
saw in everything the unerring finger of the Divine Mother. Even the
light that leads astray was to him the light from God.

To those who became his intimate disciples the Master was a friend,
companion, and playmate. Even the chores of religious discipline would
be lightened in his presence. The devotees would be so inebriated with
pure joy in his company that they would have no time to ask themselves
whether he was an Incarnation, a perfect soul, or a yogi. His very
presence was a great teaching; words were superfluous. In later years
his disciples remarked that while they were with him they would regard
him as a comrade, but afterwards would tremble to think of their
frivolities in the presence of such a great person. They had convincing
proof that the Master could, by his mere wish, kindle in their hearts
the love of God and give them His vision.

Through all this fun and frolic, this merriment and frivolity, he always
kept before them the shining ideal of God-Consciousness and the path of
renunciation. He prescribed ascents steep or graded according to the
powers of the climber. He permitted no compromise with the basic
principles of purity. An aspirant had to keep his body, mind, senses,
and soul unspotted; had to have a sincere love for God and an ever
mounting spirit of yearning. The rest would be done by the Mother.

His disciples were of two kinds: the householders, and the young men,
some of whom were later to become monks. There was also a small group of
women devotees.

**House Holder Devotees**

For the householders Sri Ramakrishna did not prescribe the hard path of
total renunciation. He wanted them to discharge their obligations to
their families. Their renunciation was to be mental. Spiritual life
could not he acquired by flying away from responsibilities. A married
couple should live like brother and sister after the birth of one or two
children, devoting their time to spiritual talk and contemplation. He
encouraged the householders, saying that their life was, in a way,
easier than that of the monk, since it was more advantageous to fight
the enemy from inside a fortress than in an open field. He insisted,
however, on their repairing into solitude every now and then to
strengthen their devotion and faith in God through prayer, japa, and
meditation. He prescribed for them the companionship of *sādhus*. He
asked them to perform their worldly duties with one hand, while holding
to God with the other, and to pray to God to make their duties fewer and
fewer so that in the end they might cling to Him with both hands. He
would discourage in both the householders and the celibate youths any
lukewarmness in their spiritual struggles. He would not ask them to
follow indiscriminately the ideal of non-resistance, which ultimately
makes a coward of the unwary.

**Future Monks**

But to the young men destined to be monks he pointed out the steep path
of renunciation, both external and internal. They must take the vow of
absolute continence and eschew all thought of greed and lust. By the
practice of continence, aspirants develop a subtle nerve through which
they understand the deeper mysteries of God. For them self-control is
final, imperative, and absolute. The sannyāsis are teachers of men, and
their lives should be totally free from blemish. They must not even look
at a picture which may awaken their animal passions. The Master selected
his future monks from young men untouched by \"woman and gold\" and
plastic enough to be cast in his spiritual mould. When teaching them the
path of renunciation and discrimination, he would not allow the
householders to be any where near them.

**Rām and Manomohan**

The first two householder devotees to come to Dakshineśwar were Rām
Chandra Dutta and Manomohan Mitra. A medical practitioner and chemist,
Rām was sceptical about God and religion and never enjoyed peace of
soul. He wanted tangible proof of God\'s existence. The Master said to
him: \"God really exists. You don\'t see the stars in the day-time, but
that doesn\'t mean that the stars do not exist. There is butter in milk.
But can anybody see it by merely looking at the milk? To get butter you
must churn milk in a quiet and cool place. You cannot realize God by a
mere wish; you must go through some mental disciplines.\" By degrees the
Master awakened Rām\'s spirituality and the latter became one of his
foremost lay disciples. It was Rām who introduced Narendranāth to Sri
Ramakrishna. Narendra was a relative of Rām.

Manomohan at first met with considerable opposition from his wife and
other relatives, who resented his visits to Dakshineśwar. But in the end
the unselfish love of the Master triumphed over worldly affection. It
was Manomohan who brought Rākhāl to the Master.

**Surendra**

Suresh Mitra, a beloved disciple whom the Master often addressed as
Surendra, had received an English education and held an important post
in an English firm. Like many other educated young men of the time, he
prided himself on his atheism and led a Bohemian life. He was addicted
to drinking. He cherished an exaggerated notion about man\'s free will.
A victim of mental depression, he was brought to Sri Ramakrishna by
Rāmchandra Dutta. When he heard the Master asking a disciple to practise
the virtue of self-surrender to God, he was impressed. But though he
tried thenceforth to do so, he was unable to give up his old associates
and his drinking. One day the Master said in his presence, \"Well, when
a man goes to an undesirable place, why doesn\'t he take the Divine
Mother with him?\" And to Surendra himself Sri Ramakrishna said: \"Why
should you drink wine as wine? Offer it to Kāli, and then take it as Her
*Prasād,* as consecrated drink. But see that you don\'t, become
intoxicated; you must not reel and your thoughts must not wander. At
first you will feel ordinary excitement, but soon you will experience
spiritual exaltation.\" Gradually Surendra\'s entire life was changed.
The Master designated him as one of those commissioned by the Divine
Mother to defray a great part of his expenses. Surendra\'s purse was
always open for the Master\'s comfort.

**Kedār**

Kedarnāth Chatterji was endowed with a spiritual temperament and had
tried various paths of religion, some not very commendable. When he met
the Master at Dakshineśwar he understood the true meaning of religion.
It is said that the Master, weary of instructing devotees who were
coming to him in great numbers for guidance, once prayed to the Goddess
Kāli: \"Mother, I am tired of speaking to people. Please give power to
Kedār, Girish, Rām, Vijay, and Mahendra to give them the preliminary
instruction, so that just a little teaching from me will be enough.\" He
was aware, however, of Kedār\'s lingering attachment to worldly things
and often warned him about it.

**Harish**

Harish, a young man in affluent circumstances, renounced his family and
took shelter with the Master, who loved him for his sincerity,
singleness of purpose, and quiet nature. He spent his leisure time in
prayer and meditation, turning a deaf ear to the entreaties and threats
of his relatives. Referring to his undisturbed peace of mind, the Master
would say: \"Real men are dead to the world though, living. Look at
Harish. He is an example.\" When one day the Master asked him to be a
little kind to his wife, Harish said: \"You must excuse me on this
point. This is not the place to show kindness. If I try to be
sympathetic to her, there is a possibility of my forgetting the ideal
and becoming entangled in the world.\"

**Bhavanāth**

Bhavanāth Chatterji visited the Master while he was still in his teens.
His parents and relatives regarded Sri Ramakrishna as an insane person
and tried their utmost to prevent him from becoming intimate with the
Master. But the young boy was very stubborn and often spent nights at
Dakshineśwar. He was greatly attached

*sādhus*

to Narendra, and the Master encouraged their friendship. The very sight
of him often awakened Sri Ramakrishna\'s spiritual emotion.

**Balarām Bose**

Balarām Bose came of a wealthy Vaishnava family. From his youth he had
shown a deep religious temperament and had devoted his time to
meditation, prayer, and the study of the Vaishnava scriptures. He was
very much impressed by Sri Ramakrishna even at their first meeting. He
asked Sri Ramakrishna whether God really existed and, if so, whether a
man could realize Him. The Master said: \"God reveals Himself to the
devotee who thinks of Him as his nearest and dearest. Because you do not
draw response by praying to Him once, you must not conclude that He does
not exist. Pray to God, thinking of Him as dearer than your very self.
He is much attached to His devotees. He comes to a man even before He is
sought. There is none more intimate and affectionate than God.\" Balarām
had never before heard God spoken of in such forceful words; every one
of the words seemed true to him. Under the Master\'s influence he
outgrew the conventions of the Vaishnava worship and became one of the
most beloved of the disciples. It was at his home that the Master slept
whenever he spent a night in Calcutta.

**Mahendra or M.**

Mahendranāth Gupta, known as \"M.\", arrived at Dakshineśwar in February
1882. He belonged to the Brāhmo Samāj and was headmaster of the
Vidyāsāgar High School at Śyāmbazār, Calcutta. At the very first sight
the Master recognized him as one of his \"marked\" disciples. Mahendra
recorded in his diary Sri Ramakrishna\'s conversations with his
devotees. These are the first directly recorded words, in the spiritual
history of the world, of a man recognized as belonging in the class of
Buddha and Christ. The present volume is a translation of this diary.
Mahendra was instrumental, through his personal contacts, in spreading
the Master\'s message among many young and aspiring souls.

**Nāg Mahāshay**

Durgācharan Nāg, also known as Nāg Mahāshay, was the ideal householder
among the lay disciples of Sri Ramakrishna. He was the embodiment of the
Master\'s ideal of life in the world, unstained by worldliness. In spite
of his intense desire to become a sannyāsi, Sri Ramakrishna asked him to
live in the world in the spirit of a monk, and the disciple truly
carried out this injunction. He was born of a poor family and even
during his boyhood often sacrificed everything to lessen the sufferings
of the needy. He had married at an early age and after his wife\'s death
had married a second time to obey his father\'s command. But he once
said to his wife: \"Love on the physical level never lasts. He is indeed
blessed who can give his love to God with his whole heart. Even a little
attachment to the body endures for several births. So do not be attached
to this cage of bone and flesh. Take shelter at the feet of the Mother
and think of Her alone. Thus your life here and hereafter will he
ennobled.\" The Master spoke of him as a \"blazing light\". He received
every word of Sri Ramakrishna in dead earnest. One day he heard the
Master saying that it was difficult for doctors, lawyers, and brokers to
make much progress in spirituality. Of doctors he said, \"If the mind
clings to the tiny drops of medicine, how can it conceive of the
Infinite?\" That was the end of Durgācharan\'s medical practice and he
threw his chest of medicines into the Ganges. Sri Ramakrishna assured
him that he would not lack simple food and clothing. He

bade him serve holy men. On being asked where he would find real holy
men, the Master said that the themselves would seek his company. No
sannyāsi could have lived a more austere life than Durgācharan.

**Girish Ghosh**

Girish Chandra Ghosh was a born rebel against God, a sceptic, a
Bohemian, a drunkard. He was the greatest Bengāli dramatist of his time,
the father of the modern Bengāli stage. Like other young men he had
imbibed all the vices of the West. He had plunged into a life of
dissipation and had become convinced that religion was only a fraud.
Materialistic philosophy he justified as enabling one to get at least a
little fun out of life. But a series of reverses shocked him and he
became eager to solve the riddle of life. He had heard people say that
in spiritual life the help of a guru was imperative and that the guru
was to be regarded as God Himself. But Girish was too well acquainted
with human nature to see perfection in a man. His first meeting with Sri
Ramakrishna did not impress him at all. He returned home feeling as if
he had seen a freak at a circus; for the

Master, in a semi-conscious mood, had inquired whether it was evening,
though the lamps were burning in the room. But their paths often
crossed, and Girish could not avoid further encounters. The Master
attended a performance in Girish\'s Star Theatre. On this occasion, too,
Girish found nothing impressive about him. One day, however, Girish
happened to see the Master dancing and singing with the devotees. He
felt the contagion and wanted to join them, but restrained himself for
fear of ridicule. Another day Sri Ramakrishna was about to give him
spiritual instruction, when Girish said: \"I don\'t want to listen to
instructions. I have myself written many instructions. They are of no
use to me. Please help me in a more tangible way if you can.\" This
pleased the Master and he asked Girish to cultivate faith.

As time passed, Girish began to learn that the guru is the one who
silently unfolds the disciple\'s inner life. He became a steadfast
devotee of the Master.

He often loaded the Master with insults, drank in his presence, and took
liberties which astounded the other devotees. But the Master knew that
at heart Girish was tender, faithful, and sincere. He would not allow
Girish to give up the theatre. And when a devotee asked him to tell
Girish to give up drinking, he sternly replied: \"That is none of your
business. He who has taken charge of him will look after him. Girish is
a devotee of heroic type. I tell you, drinking will not affect him.\"
The Master knew that mere words could not induce a man to break
deep-rooted habits, but that the silent influence of love worked
miracles. Therefore he never asked him to give up alcohol, with the
result that Girish himself eventually broke the habit. Sri Ramakrishna
had strengthened Girish\'s resolution by allowing him to feel that he
was absolutely free.

One day Girish felt depressed because he was unable to submit to any
routine of spiritual discipline. In an exalted mood the Master said to
him: \"All right, give me your power of attorney. Henceforth I assume
responsibility for you. You need not do anything.\" Girish heaved a sigh
of relief. He felt happy to think that Sri Ramakrishna had assumed his
spiritual responsibilities. But poor Girish could not then realize that
he also, on his part, had to give up his freedom and make of himself a
puppet in Sri Ramakrishna\'s hands. The Master began to discipline him
according to this new attitude. One day Girish said about a trifling
matter, \"Yes, I shall do this.\" \"No, no!\" the Master corrected him.
\"You must not speak in that egotistic manner. You should say, \'God
willing, I shall do it\'.\" Girish understood. Thenceforth he tried to
give up all idea of personal responsibility and surrender himself to the
Divine Will. His mind began to dwell constantly on Sri Ramakrishna. This
unconscious meditation in time chastened his turbulent spirit.

The householder devotees generally visited Sri Ramakrishna on Sunday
afternoons and other holidays. Thus a brotherhood was gradually formed,
and the Master encouraged their fraternal feeling. Now and then he would
accept an invitation to a devotee\'s home, where other devotees would
also be invited. Kirtan would be arranged and they would spend hours in
dance and devotional music. The Master would go into trances or open his
heart in religious discourses and in the narration of his own spiritual
experiences. Many people who could not go to Dakshineśwar participated
in these meetings and felt blessed. Such an occasion would be concluded
with a sumptuous feast.

But it was in the company of his younger devotees, pure souls yet
unstained by the touch of worldliness, that Sri Ramakrishna took
greatest joy. Among the young men who later embraced the householder\'s
life were Nārāyan, Paltu, the younger Naren, Tejchandra and Purna. These
visited the Master sometimes against strong opposition from home.

**Purna**

Purna was a lad of thirteen, whom Sri Ramakrishna described as an
*Iśvarakoti,* a soul born with special spiritual qualities. The Master
said that Purna was the last of the group of brilliant devotees who, as
he once had seen in a trance, would come to him for spiritual
illumination. Purna said to Sri Ramakrishna during their second meeting,
\"You are God Himself incarnated in flesh and blood.\" Such words coming
from a mere youngster proved of what stuff the boy was made.

**Mahimācharan and Pratāp Hazra**

Mahimācharan and Pratāp Hazra were two devotees outstanding for their
pretentiousness and idiosyncrasies. But the Master showed them his
unfailing love and kindness, though he was aware of their shortcomings.
Mahimācharan Chakravarty had met the Master long before the arrival of
the other disciples. He had had the intention of leading a spiritual
life, but a strong desire to acquire name and fame was his weakness. He
claimed to have been initiated by Totāpuri and used to say that he had
been following the path of knowledge according to his guru\'s
instructions. He possessed a large library of English and Sanskrit
books. But though he pretended to have read them, most of the leaves
were uncut. The Master knew all his limitations, yet enjoyed listening
to him recite from the Vedas and other scriptures. He would always
exhort Mahimā to meditate on the meaning of the scriptural texts and to
practise spiritual discipline.

Pratāp Hazra, a middle-aged man, hailed from a village near Kāmārpukur.
He was not altogether unresponsive to religious feelings. On a moment\'s
impulse he had left his home, aged mother, wife, and children, and had
found shelter in the temple garden at Dakshineśwar, where he intended to
lead a spiritual life. He loved to argue, and the Master often pointed
him out as an example of barren argumentation. He was hypercritical of
others and cherished an exaggerated notion of his own spiritual
advancement. He was mischievous and often tried to upset the minds of
the Master\'s young disciples, criticizing them for their happy and
joyous life and asking them to devote their time to meditation. The
Master teasingly compared Hazra to Jatila and Kutila, the two women who
always created obstructions in Krishna\'s sport with the gopis, and said
that Hazra lived at Dakshineśwar to \"thicken the plot\" by adding
complications.

**Some noted Men**

Sri Ramakrishna also became acquainted with a number of people whose
scholarship or wealth entitled them everywhere to respect. He had met, a
few years before, **Devendranāth Tāgore,** famous all over Bengāl for
his wealth, scholarship, saintly character, and social position. But the
Master found him disappointing; for, whereas Sri Ramakrishna expected of
a saint complete renunciation of the world, Devendranāth combined with
his saintliness a life of enjoyment. Sri Ramakrishna met the great poet
**Michael Madhusudan,** who had embraced Christianity \"for the sake of
his stomach\". To him the Master could not impart instruction, for the
Divine Mother \"pressed his tongue\". In addition he met **Mahārāja
Jatindra Mohan Tāgore,** a titled aristocrat of Bengāl; **Kristodās
Pāl,** the editor, social reformer, and patriot; **Iswar Chandra
Vidyāsāgar,** the noted philanthropist and educator; **Pundit
Śaśadhar,** a great champion of Hindu orthodoxy; **Aświni Kumār Dutta,**
a headmaster, moralist, and leader of Indian Nationalism; and **Bankim
Chatterji,** a deputy magistrate, novelist, and essayist, and one of the
fashioners of modern Bengāli prose. Sri Ramakrishna was not the man to
be dazzled by outward show, glory, or eloquence. A pundit without
discrimination he regarded as a mere straw. He would search people\'s
hearts for the light of God, and if that was missing, he would have
nothing to do with them.

**Kristodās Pāl**

The Europeanized Kristodās Pāl did not approve of the Master\'s emphasis
on renunciation and said: \"Sir, this cant of renunciation has almost
ruined the country. It is for this reason that the Indians are a subject
nation today. Doing good to others, bringing education to the door of
the ignorant, and above all, improving the material conditions of the
country - these should be our duty now. The cry of religion and
renunciation would, on the contrary, only weaken us. You should advise
the young men of Bengāl to resort only to such acts as will uplift the
country.\" Sri Ramakrishna gave him a searching look and found no divine
light within. \"You man of poor understanding!\" Sri Ramakrishna said
sharply. \"You dare to slight in these terms renunciation and piety,
which our scriptures describe as the greatest of all virtues! After
reading two pages of English you think you have come to know the world!
You appear to think you are omniscient. Well, have you seen those tiny
crabs that are born in the Ganges just when the rains set in? In this
big universe you are even less significant than one of those small
creatures. How dare you talk of helping the world? The Lord will look to
that. You haven\'t the power in you to do it.\" After a pause the Master
continued: \"Can you explain to me how you can work for others? I know
what you mean by helping them. To feed a number of persons, to treat
them when they are sick, to construct a road or dig a well - Isn\'t that
all? These are good deeds, no doubt, but how trifling in comparison with
the vastness of the universe! How far can a man advance in this line?
How many

people can you save from famine? Malaria has ruined a whole province;
what could you do to stop its onslaught? God alone looks after the
world. Let a man first realize Him. Let a man get the authority from God
and be endowed with His power; then, and then alone, may he think of
doing good to others. A man should first be purged of all egotism. Then
alone will the Blissful Mother ask him to work for the world.\" Sri
Ramakrishna mistrusted philanthropy that presumed to pose as charity. He
warned people against it. He saw in most acts of philanthropy nothing
but egotism, vanity, a desire for glory, a barren excitement to kill the
boredom of life, or an attempt to soothe a guilty conscience. True
charity, he taught, is the result of love of God - service to man in a
spirit of worship.

**Monastic Disciples**

The disciples whom the Master trained for monastic life were the
following:

1.  Narendranāth Dutta (Swāmi Vivekānanda)

    > Nitya Niranjan Sen (Swāmi Niranjanānanda)

    > Rākhāl Chandra Ghosh (Swāmi Brahmānanda)

    > Kāliprasād Chandra (Swāmi Abhedānanda)

    > Gopāl Chandra Ghosh (Swāmi Advaitānanda)

    > Harināth Chattopādhyāya (Swāmi Turiyānanda)

    > Bāburām Ghosh (Swāmi Premānanda)

    > Sāradā Prasanna (Swāmi Trigunātitānanda)

    > Tāraknāth Ghoshāl (Swāmi Shivānanda)

    > Gangādhar Ghatak (Swāmi Akhandānanda)

    > Jogindranāth Choudhury (Swāmi Yogānanda)

    > Subodh Ghosh (Swāmi Subodhānanda)

    > Śashibhushan Chakravarty (Swāmi Rāmakrishnānanda)

    > Śaratchandra Chakravarty (Swāmi Sāradānanda)

    > Hariprasanna Chatterji (Swāmi Vijnānānanda)

    > Lātu (Swāmi Adhhutānanda)

**Lātu**

The first of these young men to come to the Master was Lātu. Born of
obscure parents, in Behar, he came to Calcutta in search of work and was
engaged by Rāmchandra Dutta as house-boy. Learning of the saintly Sri
Ramakrishna, he visited the Master at Dakshineśwar and was deeply
touched by his cordiality. When he was about to leave, the Master asked
him to take some money and return home in a boat or carriage. But Lātu
declared he had a few pennies and jingled the coins in his pocket. Sri
Ramakrishna later requested Rām to allow Lātu to stay with him
permanently. Under Sri Ramakrishna\'s guidance Lātu made great progress
in meditation and was blessed with ecstatic visions, but all the efforts
of the Master to give him a smattering of education failed. Lātu was
very fond of kirtan and other devotional songs but remained all his life
illiterate.

**Rākhāl**

Even before Rākhāl\'s coming to Dakshineśwar, the Master had had visions
of him as his spiritual son and as a playmate of Krishna at Vrindāvan.
Rākhāl was born of wealthy parents. During his childhood he developed
wonderful spiritual traits and used to play at worshipping gods and
goddesses. In his teens he was married to a sister of Manomohan Mitra,
from whom he first heard of the Master. His father objected to his
association with Sri Ramakrishna but afterwards was reassured to find
that many celebrated people were visitors at Dakshineśwar. The
relationship between the Master and this beloved disciple was that of
mother and child. Sri Ramakrishna allowed Rākhāl many liberties denied
to others. But he would not hesitate to chastise the boy for improper
actions. At one time Rākhāl felt a childlike jealousy because he found
that other boys were receiving the Master\'s affection. He soon got over
it and realized his guru as the Guru of the whole universe. The Master
was worried to hear of his marriage, but was relieved to find that his
wife was a spiritual soul who would not be a hindrance to his progress.

**The Elder Gopāl**

Gopāl Chandra Ghosh came to Dakshineśwar at a rather advanced age and
was called the elder Gopāl. He had lost his wife, and the Master
assuaged his grief. Soon he renounced the world and devoted himself
fully to meditation and prayer. Some years later Gopāl gave the Master
the ochre cloths with which the latter initiated several of his
disciples into monastic life.

**Narendra**

To spread his message to the four corners of the earth Sri Ramakrishna
needed a strong instrument. With his frail body and delicate limbs he
could not make great journeys across wide spaces. And such an instrument
was found in Narendranāth Dutta, his beloved Naren, later known to the
world as Swāmi Vivekānanda. Even before meeting Narendranāth, the Master
had seen him in a vision as a sage, immersed in the meditation of the
Absolute, who at Sri Ramakrishna\'s request had agreed to take human
birth to assist him in his work.

Narendra was born in Calcutta on January 12, 1863, of an aristocratic
*Kāyastha* family. His mother was steeped in the great Hindu epics, and
his father, a distinguished attorney of the Calcutta High Court, was an
agnostic about religion, a friend of the poor, and a mocker at social
conventions. Even in his boyhood and youth Narendra possessed great
physical courage and presence of mind, a vivid imagination, deep power
of thought, keen intelligence, an extraordinary memory, a love of truth,
a passion for purity, a spirit of independence, and a tender heart. An
expert musician, he also acquired proficiency in physics, astronomy,
mathematics, philosophy, history, and literature. He grew up into an
extremely handsome young man. Even as a child he practised meditation
and showed great power of concentration. Though free and passionate in
word and action, he took the vow of austere religious chastity and never
allowed the fire of purity to be extinguished by the slightest
defilement of body or soul.

As he read in college the rationalistic Western philosophers of the
nineteenth century, his boyhood faith in God and religion was unsettled.
He would not accept religion on mere faith; he wanted demonstration of
God. But very soon his passionate nature discovered that mere Universal
Reason was cold and bloodless. His emotional nature, dissatisfied with a
mere abstraction, required a concrete support to help him in the hours
of temptation. He wanted an external power, a guru, who by embodying
perfection in the flesh would still the commotion of his soul. Attracted
by the magnetic personality of Keshab, he joined the Brāhmo Samāj and
became a singer in its choir. But in the Samāj he did not find the guru
who could say that he had seen God.

In a state of mental conflict and torture of soul, Narendra came to Sri
Ramakrishna at Dakshineśwar. He was then eighteen years of age and had
been in college two years. He entered the Master\'s room accompanied by
some light-hearted friends. At Sri Ramakrishna\'s request he sang a few
songs, pouring his whole soul into them, and the Master went into
Samādhi. A few minutes later Sri Ramakrishna suddenly left his seat,
took Narendra by the hand, and led him to the screened verandah north of
his room. They were alone. Addressing Narendra most tenderly, as if he
were a friend of long acquaintance, the Master said: \"Ah! You have come
very late. Why have you been so unkind as to make me wait all these
days? My ears are tired of hearing the futile words of worldly men. Oh,
how I have longed to pour my spirit into the heart of someone fitted to
receive my message!\" He talked thus, sobbing all the time. Then,
standing before Narendra with folded hands, he addressed him as
**Nārāyana**, born on earth to remove the misery of humanity. Grasping
Narendra\'s hand, he asked him to come again, alone, and very soon.
Narendra was startled. \"What is this I have come to see?\" he said to
himself. \"He must be stark mad. Why, I am the son of Viswanāth Dutta.
How dare he speak this way to me?\"

When they returned to the room and Narendra heard the Master speaking to
others, he was surprised to find in his words an inner logic, a striking
sincerity, and a convincing proof of his spiritual nature. In answer to
Narendra\'s question, \"Sir, have you seen God?\" the Master said:
\"Yes, I have seen God. I have seen Him more tangibly than I see you. I
have talked to Him more intimately than I am talking to you.\"
Continuing, the Master said: \"But, my child, who wants to see God?
People shed jugs of tears for money, wife, and children. But if they
would weep for God for only one day they would surely see Him.\"
Narendra was amazed. These

words he could not doubt. This was the first time he had ever heard a
man saying that he had seen God. But he could not reconcile these words
of the Master with the scene that had taken place on the verandah only a
few minutes before. He concluded that Sri Ramakrishna was a monomaniac,
and returned home rather puzzled in mind.

During his second visit, about a month later, suddenly, at the touch of
the Master, Narendra felt overwhelmed and saw the walls of the room and
everything around him whirling and vanishing. \"What are you doing to
me?

23. he cried in terror. \"I have my father and mother at home.\" He saw
    his own ego and the whole universe almost swallowed in a nameless
    void. With a laugh the Master easily restored him. Narendra thought
    he might have been hypnotized, but he could not understand how a
    monomaniac could cast a spell over the mind of a strong person like
    himself. He returned home more confused than ever, resolved to be
    henceforth on his guard before this strange man.

But during his third visit Narendra fared no better. This time, at the
Master\'s touch, he lost consciousness entirely. While he was still in
that state, Sri Ramakrishna questioned him concerning his spiritual
antecedents and whereabouts, his mission in this world, and the duration
of his mortal life. The answers confirmed what the Master himself had
known and inferred. Among other things, he came to know that Narendra
was a sage who had already attained perfection, and that the day he
learnt his real nature he would give up his body in yoga, by an act of
will.

A few more meetings completely removed from Narendra\'s mind the last
traces of the notion that Sri Ramakrishna might be a monomaniac or wily
hypnotist. His integrity, purity, renunciation, and unselfishness were
beyond question. But Narendra could not accept a man, an imperfect
mortal, as his guru. As a member of the Brāhmo Samāj, he could not
believe that a human intermediary was necessary between man and God.
Moreover, he openly laughed at Sri Ramakrishna\'s visions as
hallucinations. Yet in the secret chamber of his heart he bore a great
love for the Master.

Sri Ramakrishna was grateful to the Divine Mother for sending him one
who doubted his own realizations. Often he asked Narendra to test him as
the money-changers test their coins. He laughed at Narendra\'s biting
criticism of his spiritual experiences and Samādhi. When at times
Narendra\'s sharp words distressed him, the Divine Mother Herself would
console him, saying: \"Why do you listen to him? In a few days he will
believe your every word.\" He could hardly bear Narendra\'s absences.
Often he would weep bitterly for the sight of him. Sometimes Narendra
would find the Master\'s love embarrassing; and one day he sharply
scolded him, warning him that such infatuation would soon draw him down
to the level of its object. The Master was distressed and prayed to the
Divine Mother. Then he said to Narendra: \"You rogue, I won\'t listen to
you any more. Mother says that I love you because I see God in you, and
the day I no longer see God in you I shall not be able to bear even the
sight of you.\"

The Master wanted to train Narendra in the teachings of the
non-dualistic Vedānta philosophy. But Narendra, because of his Brāhmo
upbringing, considered it wholly blasphemous to look on man as one with
his Creator. One day at the temple garden he laughingly said to a
friend: \"How silly! This jug is God! This cup is God! Whatever we see
is God! And we too are God! Nothing could be more absurd.\" Sri
Ramakrishna came out of his room and gently touched him. Spellbound, he
immediately perceived that everything in the world was indeed God. A new
universe opened around him. Returning home in a dazed state, he found
there too that the food, the plate, the eater himself, the people around
him, were all God. When he walked in the street, he saw that the cabs,
the horses, the streams of people, the buildings, were all Brahman. He
could hardly go about his day\'s business. His parents became anxious
about him and thought him ill. And when the intensity of the experience
abated a little, he saw the world as a dream. Walking in the public
square, he would strike his head against the iron railings to know
whether they were real. It took him a number of days to recover his
normal self. He had a foretaste of the great experiences yet to come and
realized that the words of the Vedānta were true.

At the beginning of 1884 Narendra\'s father suddenly died of
heart-failure, leaving the family in a state of

utmost poverty. There were six or seven mouths to feed at home.
Creditors were knocking at the door. Relatives who had accepted his
father\'s unstinted kindness now became enemies, some even bringing suit
to deprive Narendra of his ancestral home. Actually starving and
barefoot, Narendra searched for a job, but without success. He began to
doubt whether anywhere in the world there was such a thing as unselfish
sympathy. Two rich women made evil proposals to him and promised to put
an end to his distress; but he refused them with contempt.

Narendra began to talk of his doubt of the very existence of God. His
friends thought he had become an atheist and piously circulated gossip
adducing unmentionable motives for his unbelief. His moral character was
maligned. Even some of the Master\'s disciples partly believed the
gossip, and Narendra told these to their faces that only a coward
believed in God through fear of suffering or hell. But he was distressed
to think that Sri Ramakrishna, too, might believe these false reports.
His pride revolted. He said to himself: \"What does it matter? If a
man\'s good name rests on such slender foundations, I don\'t care.\" But
later on he was amazed to learn that the Master had never lost faith in
him. To a disciple who complained about Narendra\'s degradation, Sri
Ramakrishna replied: \"Hush, you fool! The Mother has told me it can
never be so. I won\'t look at you if you speak that way again.\"

The moment came when Narendra\'s distress reached its climax. He had
gone the whole day without food. As he was returning home in the evening
he could hardly lift his tired limbs. He sat down in front of a house in
sheer exhaustion, too weak even to think. His mind began to wander.
Then, suddenly, a divine power lifted the veil over his soul. He found
the solution of the problem of the coexistence of divine justice and
misery, the presence of suffering in the creation of a blissful
Providence. He felt bodily refreshed, his soul was bathed in peace, and
he slept serenely.

Narendra now realized that he had a spiritual mission to fulfil. He
resolved to renounce the world, as his grandfather had renounced it, and
he came to Sri Ramakrishna for his blessing. But even before he had
opened his mouth, the Master knew what was in his mind and wept bitterly
at the thought of separation. \"I know you cannot lead a worldly life,\"
he said, \"but for my sake live in the world as long as I live.\"

One day, soon after, Narendra requested Sri Ramakrishna to pray to the
Divine Mother to remove his poverty. Sri Ramakrishna bade him pray to
Her himself, for She would certainly listen to his prayer. Narendra
entered the shrine of Kāli. As he stood before the image of the Mother,
he beheld Her as a living Goddess, ready to give wisdom and liberation.
Unable to ask Her for petty worldly things, he prayed only for knowledge
and renunciation, love and liberation. The Master rebuked him for his
failure to ask the Divine Mother to remove his poverty and sent him back
to the temple. But Narendra, standing in Her presence, again forgot the
purpose of his coming. Thrice he went to the temple at the bidding of
the Master, and thrice he returned, having forgotten in Her presence why
he had come. He was wondering about it when it suddenly flashed in his
mind that this was all the work of Sri Ramakrishna; so now he asked the
Master himself to remove his poverty, and was assured that his family
would not lack simple food and clothing.

This was a very rich and significant experience for Narendra. It taught
him that Śakti, the Divine Power, cannot be ignored in the world and
that in the relative plane the need of worshipping a Personal God is
imperative. Sri Ramakrishna was overjoyed with the conversion. The next
day, sitting almost on Narendra\'s lap, he said to a devotee, pointing
first to himself, then to Narendra: \"I see I am this, and again that.
Really I feel no difference. A stick floating in the Ganges seems to
divide the water; but in reality the water is one. Do you see my point?
Well, whatever is, is the Mother - isn\'t that so?\" In later years
Narendra would say: \"Sri Ramakrishna was the only person who, from the
time he met me, believed in me uniformly throughout. Even my mother and
brothers did not. It was his unwavering trust and love for me that bound
me to him for ever. He alone knew how to love. Worldly people only make
a show of love for selfish ends.\"

**Tārak**

Others destined to be monastic disciples of Sri Ramakrishna came to
Dakshineśwar. Tāraknāth Ghoshāl had felt from his boyhood the noble
desire to realize God. Keshab and the Brāhmo Samāj had attracted him but

proved inadequate. In 1882 he first met the Master at Rāmchandra\'s
house and was astonished to hear him talk about Samādhi, a subject which
always fascinated his mind. And that evening he actually saw a
manifestation of that superconscious state in the Master. Tārak became a
frequent visitor at Dakshineśwar and received the Master\'s grace in
abundance. The young boy often felt ecstatic fervour in meditation. He
also wept profusely while meditating on God. Sri Ramakrishna said to
him: \"God favours those who can weep for Him. Tears shed for God wash
away the sins of former births.\"

**Bāburām**

Bāburām Ghosh came to Dakshineśwar accompanied by Rākhāl, his classmate.
The Master, as was often his custom, examined the boy\'s physiognomy and
was satisfied about his latent spirituality. At the age of eight Bāburām
had thought of leading a life of renunciation, in the company of a monk,
in a hut shut out from the public view by a thick wall of trees. The
very sight of the Panchavati awakened in his heart that dream of
boyhood. Bāburām was tender in body and soul. The Master used to say
that he was pure to his very bones. One day Hazra in his usual
mischievous fashion advised Bāburām and some of the other young boys to
ask Sri Ramakrishna for some spiritual powers and not waste their life
in mere gaiety and merriment. The Master, scenting mischief, called
Bāburām to his side, and said: \"What can you ask of me? Isn\'t
everything that I have already yours? Yes, everything I have earned in
the shape of realizations is for the sake of you all. So get rid of the
idea of begging, which alienates by creating a distance. Rather realize
your kinship with me and gain the key to all the treasures.\"

**Niranjan**

Nitya Niranjan Sen was a disciple of heroic type. He came to the Master
when he was eighteen years old. He was a medium for a group of
spiritualists. During his first visit the Master said to him: \"My boy,
if you think always of ghosts you will become a ghost, and if you think
of God you will become God. Now, which do you prefer?\" Niranjan severed
all connections with the spiritualists. During his second visit the
Master embraced him and said warmly: \"Niranjan, my boy, the days are
flitting away. When will you realize God? This life will be in vain if
you do not realize Him. When will You devote your mind wholly to God?\"
Niranjan was surprised to see the Master\'s great anxiety for his
spiritual welfare. He was a young man endowed with unusual spiritual
parts. He felt disdain for worldly pleasures and was totally guileless,
like a child. But he had a violent temper. One day, as he was coming in
a country boat to Dakshineśwar, some of his fellow passengers began to
speak ill of the Master. Finding his protest futile, Niranjan began to
rock the boat, threatening to sink it in midstream. That silenced the
offenders. When he reported the incident to the Master, he was rebuked
for his inability to curb his anger.

**Jogindra**

Jogindranāth, on the other hand, was gentle to a fault. One day, under
circumstances very like those that had evoked Niranjan\'s anger, he
curbed his temper and held his peace instead of threatening Sri
Ramakrishna\'s abusers. The Master, learning of his conduct, scolded him
roundly. Thus to each the fault of the other was recommended as a
virtue. The guru was striving to develop, in the first instance,
composure, and in the second, mettle. The secret of his training was to
build up, by a tactful recognition of the requirements of each given
case, the character of the devotee.

Jogindranāth came of an aristocratic brāhmin family of Dakshineśwar. His
father and relatives shared the popular mistrust of Sri Ramakrishna\'s
sanity. At a very early age the boy developed religious tendencies,
spending two or three hours daily in meditation, and his meeting with
Sri Ramakrishna deepened his desire for the realization of God. He had a
perfect horror of marriage. But at the earnest request of his mother he
had had to yield, and he now believed that his spiritual future was
doomed. So he kept himself away from the Master.

Sri Ramakrishna employed a ruse to bring Jogindra to him. As soon as the
disciple entered the room, the Master rushed forward to meet the young
man. Catching hold of the disciple\'s hand, he said: \"What if you have
married, Haven\'t I too married? What is there to be afraid of in
that?\" Touching his own chest he said:

\"If this \[meaning himself\] is propitious, then even a hundred
thousand marriages cannot injure you. It you desire to lead a
householder\'s life, then bring your wife here one day, and I shall see
that she becomes a real companion in your spiritual progress. But if you
want to lead a monastic life, then I shall eat up your attachment to the
world.\" Jogin was dumbfounded at these words. He received new strength,
and his spirit of renunciation was re-established.

**Śashi and Śarat**

Śashi and Śarat were two cousins who came from a pious brāhmin family of
Calcutta. At an early age they had joined the Brāhmo Samāj and had come
under the influence of Keshab Sen. The Master said to them at their
first meeting: \"If bricks and tiles are burnt after the trade-mark has
been stamped on them, they retain the mark for ever. Similarly, man
should be stamped with God before entering the world. Then he will not
become attached to worldliness.\" Fully aware of the future course of
their life, he asked them not to marry. The Master asked Śashi whether
he believed in God with form or in God without form. Śashi replied that
he was not even sure about the existence of God; so he could not speak
one way or the other. This frank answer very much pleased the Master.

Śarat\'s soul longed for the all-embracing realization of the Godhead.
When the Master inquired whether there was any particular form of God he
wished to see, the boy replied that he would like to see God in all the
living beings of the world. \"But\", the Master demurred, \"that is the
last word in realization. One cannot have it at the very outset.\" Śarat
stated calmly: \"I won\'t be satisfied with anything short of that. I
shall trudge on along the path till I attain that blessed state.\" Sri
Ramakrishna was very much pleased.

**Harināth**

Harināth had led the austere life of a *brahmachāri* even from his early
boyhood -bathing in the Ganges every day, cooking his own meals, waking
before sunrise, and reciting the Gita from memory before leaving bed. He
found in the Master the embodiment of the Vedānta scriptures. Aspiring
to be a follower of the ascetic Śankara, he cherished a great hatred for
women. One day he said to the Master that he could not allow even small
girls to come near him. The Master scolded him and said: \"You are
talking like a fool. Why should you hate women? They are the
manifestations of the Divine Mother. Regard them as your own mother and
you will never feel their evil influence. The more you hate them, the
more you will fall into their snares.\" Hari said later that these words
completely changed his attitude toward women.

The Master knew Hari\'s passion for Vedānta. But he did not wish any of
his disciples to become a dry ascetic or a mere bookworm. So he asked
Hari to practise Vedānta in life by giving up the unreal and following
the Real. \"But it is not so easy\", Sri Ramakrishna said, \"to realize
the illusoriness of the world. Study alone does not help one very much.
The grace of God is required. Mere personal effort is futile. A man is a
tiny creature after all, with very limited powers. But he can achieve
the impossible if he prays to God for His grace.\" Whereupon the Master
sang a song in praise of grace. Hari was profoundly moved and shed
tears. Later in life Hari achieved a wonderful synthesis of the ideals
of the Personal God and the Impersonal Truth.

**Gangādhar**

Gangādhar, Harināth\'s friend, also led the life of a strict
*brahmachari*, eating vegetarian food cooked by his own hands and
devoting himself to the study of the scriptures. He met the Master in
1884 and soon became a member of his inner circle. The Master praised
his ascetic habit and attributed it to the spiritual disciplines of his
past life. Gangādhar became a close companion of Narendra.

**Hariprasanna**

Hariprasanna, a college student, visited the Master in the company of
his friends Śashi and Śarat. Sri Ramakrishna showed him great favour by
initiating him into spiritual life. As long as he lived, Hariprasanna
remembered and observed the following drastic advice of the Master:
\"Even if a woman is pure as gold and rolls on the ground for love of
God, it is dangerous for a monk ever to look at her.\"

**Kāli**

Kāliprasād visited the Master toward the end of 1883. Given to the
practice of meditation and the study of the scriptures, Kāli was
particularly interested in yoga. Feeling the need of a guru in spiritual
life, he came to the Master and was accepted as a disciple. The young
boy possessed a rational mind and often felt sceptical about the
Personal God. The Master said to him: \"Your doubts will soon disappear.
Others, too, have passed through such a state of mind. Look at Naren. He
now weeps at the names of Rādhā and Krishna.\" Kāli began to see visions
of gods and goddesses. Very soon these disappeared and in meditation he
experienced vastness, infinity, and the other attributes of the
Impersonal Brahman.

**Subodh**

Subodh visited the Master in 1885. At the very first meeting Sri
Ramakrishna said to him: \"You will succeed. Mother says so. Those whom
She sends here will certainly attain spirituality.\" During the second
meeting the Master wrote something on Subodh\'s tongue, stroked his body
from the navel to the throat, and said, \"Awake, Mother! Awake.\" He
asked the boy to meditate. At once Subodh\'s latent spirituality was
awakened. He felt a current rushing along the spinal column to the
brain. Joy filled his soul.

**Sāradā and Tulasi**

Two more young men, Sāradā Prasanna and Tulasi, complete the small band
of the Master\'s disciples later to embrace the life of the wandering
monk. With the exception of the elder Gopāl, all of them were in their
teens or slightly over. They came from middle-class Bengāli families,
and most of them were students in school or college. Their parents and
relatives had envisaged for them bright worldly careers. They came to
Sri Ramakrishna with pure bodies, vigorous minds, and uncontaminated
souls. All were born with unusual spiritual attributes. Sri Ramakrishna
accepted them, even at first sight, as his children, relatives, friends,
and companions. His magic touch unfolded them. And later each according
to his measure reflected the life of the Master, becoming a torch-bearer
of his message across land and sea.

**Woman Devotees**

With his woman devotees Sri Ramakrishna established a very sweet
relationship. He himself embodied the tender traits of a woman; he had
dwelt on the highest plane of Truth, where there is not even the
slightest trace of sex; and his innate purity evoked only the noblest
emotion in men and women alike. His woman devotees often said: \"We
seldom looked on Sri Ramakrishna as a member of the male sex. We
regarded him as one of us. We never felt any constraint before him, He
was our best confidant.\" They loved him as their child, their friend,
and their teacher. In spiritual discipline he advised them to renounce
lust and greed and especially warned them not to fall into the snares of
men.

**Gopāl Mā**

Unsurpassed among the woman devotees of the Master in the richness of
her devotion and spiritual experiences was Aghoramani Devi, an orthodox
brāhmin woman. Widowed at an early age, she had dedicated

herself completely to spiritual pursuits. Gopālā, the Baby Krishna, was
her Ideal Deity, whom she worshipped following the *Vātsalya* attitude
of the Vaishnava religion, regarding Him as her own child. Through Him
she

satisfied her unassuaged maternal love, cooking for Him, feeding Him,
bathing Him, and putting Him to bed. This sweet intimacy with Gopālā won
her the sobriquet of Gopāl Mā, or Gopālā\'s Mother. For forty years she
had lived on the bank of the Ganges in a small bare room, her only
companions being a threadbare copy of the Ramayana and a bag containing
her rosary. At the age of sixty, in 1884, she visited Sri Ramakrishna at
Dakshineśwar. During the second visit, as soon as the Master saw her, he
said: \"Oh, you have come! Give me something to eat.\" With great
hesitation she gave him some ordinary sweets that she had purchased for
him on the way. The Master ate them with relish and asked her to bring
him simple curries or sweets prepared by her own hands. Gopāl Mā thought
him a queer kind of monk, for, instead of talking of God, he always
asked for food. She did not want to visit him again, but an irresistible
attraction brought her back to the temple garden. She carried with her
some simple curries that she had cooked herself.

One early morning at three o\'clock, about a year later, Gopāl Mā was
about to finish her daily devotions, when she was startled to find Sri
Ramakrishna sitting on her left, with his right hand clenched, like the
hand of the

image of Gopālā. She was amazed and caught hold of the hand, whereupon
the figure vanished and in its place appeared the real Gopālā, her Ideal
Deity. She cried aloud with joy. Gopālā begged her for butter. She
pleaded her poverty and gave Him some dry coconut candies. Gopālā sat on
her lap, snatched away her rosary, jumped on her shoulders, and moved
all about the room. As soon as the day broke she hastened to
Dakshineśwar like an insane woman. Of course Gopālā accompanied her,
resting His head on her shoulder. She clearly saw His tiny ruddy feet
hanging over her breast. She entered Sri Ramakrishna\'s room. The Master
had fallen into Samādhi. Like a child, he sat on her lap, and she began
to feed him with butter, cream, and other delicacies. After some time he
regained consciousness and returned to his bed. But the mind of
Gopālā\'s Mother was still roaming in another plane. She was steeped in
bliss. She saw Gopālā frequently entering the Master\'s body and again
coming out of it. When she returned to her hut, still in a dazed
condition, Gopālā accompanied her.

She spent about two months in uninterrupted communion with God, the Baby
Gopālā never leaving her for a moment. Then the intensity of her vision
was lessened; had it not been, her body would have perished. The Master
spoke highly of her exalted spiritual condition and said that such
vision of God was a rare thing for ordinary mortals. The fun-loving
Master one day confronted the critical Narendranāth with this
simple-minded woman. No two could have presented a more striking
contrast. The Master knew of Narendra\'s lofty contempt for all visions,
and he asked the old lady to narrate her experiences to Narendra. With
great hesitation she told him her story. Now and then she interrupted
her maternal chatter to ask Narendra: \"My son, I am a poor ignorant
woman. I don\'t understand anything. You are so learned. Now tell me if
these visions of Gopālā are true.\" As Narendra listened to the story he
was profoundly moved. He said, \"Yes, mother, they are quite true.\"
Behind his cynicism Narendra, too, possessed a heart full of love and
tenderness.

**The March of Events**

In 1882 Hriday was, dismissed from service in the Ka1i temple, for an
act of indiscretion, and was ordered by the authorities never again to
enter the garden. In a way the hand of the Divine Mother may be seen
even in this. Having taken care of Sri Ramakrishna during the stormy
days of his spiritual discipline, Hriday had come naturally to consider
himself the sole guardian of his uncle. None could approach the Master
without his knowledge. And he would be extremely jealous if Sri
Ramakrishna paid attention to anyone else. Hriday\'s removal made it
possible for the real devotees of the Master to approach him freely and
live with him in the temple garden.

During the week-ends the householders, enjoying a respite from their
office duties, visited the Master. The meetings on Sunday afternoons
were of the nature of little festivals. Refreshments were often served.
Professional musicians now and then sang devotional songs. The Master
and the devotees sang and danced, Sri Ramakrishna frequently going into
ecstatic moods. The happy memory of such a Sunday would linger long in
the minds of the devotees. Those whom the Master wanted for special
instruction he would ask to visit him on Tuesdays and Saturdays. These
days were particularly auspicious for the worship of Kāli.

The young disciples destined to be monks, Sri Ramakrishna invited on
week-days, when the householders were not present. The training of the
householders and of the future monks had to proceed along entirely
different lines. Since M. generally visited the Master on week-ends, the
Gospel of Sri Ramakrishna does not contain much mention of the future
monastic disciples.

Finally, there was a handful of fortunate disciples, householders as
well as youngsters, who were privileged to spend nights with the Master
in his room. They would see him get up early in the morning and walk up
and down the room, singing in his sweet voice and tenderly communing
with the Mother.

**Injury to the Master\'s Arm**

One day, in January 1884, the Master was going toward the pine-grove
when he went into a trance. He was alone. There was no one to support
him or guide his footsteps. He fell to the ground and dislocated a bone
in his left arm. This accident had a significant influence on his mind,
the natural inclination of which was to soar above the consciousness of
the body. The acute pain in the arm forced his mind to dwell on the body
and on

the world outside. But he saw even in this a divine purpose; for, with
his mind compelled to dwell on the physical plane, he realized more than
ever that he was an instrument in the hand of the Divine Mother, who had
a mission to fulfil through his human body and mind. He also distinctly
found that in the phenomenal world God manifests Himself, in an
inscrutable way, through diverse human beings, both good and evil. Thus
he would speak of God in the guise of the wicked, God in the guise of
the pious, God in the guise of the hypocrite, God in the guise of the
lewd. He began to take a special delight in watching the divine play in
the relative world. Sometimes the sweet human relationship with God
would appear to him more appealing than the all-effacing Knowledge of
Brahman. Many a time he would pray: \"Mother, don\'t make me unconscious
through the Knowledge of Brahman. Don\'t give me *Brahmajnāna,* Mother.
Am I not Your child, and naturally timid? I must have my Mother. A
million salutations to the Knowledge of Brahman! Give it to those who
want it.\" Again he prayed: \"O Mother, let me remain in contact with
men! Don\'t make me a dried-up ascetic. I want to enjoy Your sport in
the world.\" He was able to taste this very rich divine experience and
enjoy the love of God and the company of His devotees because his mind,
on account of the injury to his arm, was forced to come down to the
consciousness of the body. Again, he would make fun of people who
proclaimed him as a Divine Incarnation, by pointing to his broken arm.
He would say, \"Have you ever heard of God breaking His arm?\" It took
the arm about five months to heal.

**Beginning of His Illness**

In April 1885 the Master\'s throat became inflamed. Prolonged
conversation or absorption in Samādhi, making the blood flow into the
throat, would aggravate the pain. Yet when the annual Vaishnava festival
was celebrated at Pānihāti, Sri Ramakrishna attended it against the
doctor\'s advice. With a group of disciples he spent himself in music,
dance, and ecstasy. The illness took a turn for the worse and was
diagnosed as \"clergyman\'s sore throat\". The patient was cautioned
against conversation and ecstasies. Though he followed the physician\'s
directions regarding medicine and diet, he could neither control his
trances nor withhold from seekers the solace of his advice. Sometimes,
like a sulky child, he would complain to the Mother about the crowds,
who gave him no rest day or night. He was overheard to say to Her: \"Why
do You bring here all these worthless people, who are like milk diluted
with five times its own quantity of water? My eyes are almost destroyed
with blowing the fire to dry up the water. My health is gone. It is
beyond my strength. Do it Yourself, if You want it done. This (pointing
to his own body) is but a perforated drum, and if you go on beating it
day in and day out, how long will it last?\"

But his large heart never turned anyone away. He said, \"Let me be
condemned to be born over and over again, even in the form of a dog, if
I can be of help to a single soul.\" And he bore the pain, singing
cheerfully, \"Let the body be preoccupied with illness, but, O mind,
dwell for ever in God\'s Bliss!\"

One night he had a haemorrhage of the throat. The doctor now diagnosed
the illness as cancer. Narendra was the first to break this
heart-rending news to the disciples. Within three days the Master was
removed to Calcutta for better treatment. At Balarām\'s house he
remained a week until a suitable place could be found at Śyāmpukur, in
the northern section of Calcutta. During this week he dedicated himself
practically without respite to the instruction of those beloved devotees
who had been unable to visit him oftener at Dakshineśwar. Discourses
incessantly flowed from his tongue, and he often went into Samādhi. Dr.
Mahendra Sarkār, the celebrated homeopath of Calcutta, was invited to
undertake his treatment.

**Śyāmpukur**

In the beginning of September 1885 Sri Ramakrishna was moved to
Śyāmpukur. Here Narendra organized the young disciples to attend the
Master day and night. At first they concealed the Master\'s illness from
their guardians; but when it became more serious they remained with him
almost constantly, sweeping aside the objections of their relatives and
devoting themselves whole-heartedly to the nursing of their beloved
guru. These young men, under the watchful eyes of the Master and the
leadership of Narendra, became the *Antaranga* Bhaktās, the devotees of
Sri Ramakrishna\'s inner circle. They were privileged to witness many
manifestations of the Master\'s divine powers. Narendra received
instructions regarding the propagation of his message after his death.

The Holy Mother - so Sāradā Devi had come to be affectionately known by
Sri Ramakrishna\'s devotees - was brought from Dakshineśwar to look
after the general cooking and to prepare the special diet of the
patient. The dwelling space being extremely limited, she had to adapt
herself to cramped conditions. At three o\'clock in the morning she
would finish her bath in the Ganges and then enter a small covered place
on the roof, where she spent the whole day cooking and praying. After
eleven at night, when the visitors went away, she would come down to her
small bedroom on the first floor to enjoy a few hours\' sleep. Thus she
spent three months, working hard, sleeping little, and praying
constantly for the Master\'s recovery.

At Śyāmpukur the devotees led an intense life. Their attendance on the
Master was in itself a form of spiritual discipline. His mind was
constantly soaring to an exalted plane of consciousness. Now and then
they would catch the contagion of his spiritual fervour. They sought to
divine the meaning of this illness of the Master, whom most of them had
accepted as an Incarnation of God. One group, headed by Girish with his
robust optimism and great power of imagination, believed that the
illness was a mere pretext to serve a deeper purpose. The Master had
willed his illness in order to bring the devotees together and promote
solidarity among them. As soon as this purpose was served, he would
himself get rid of the disease. A second group thought that the Divine
Mother, in whose hand the Master was an instrument, had brought about
this illness to serve Her own mysterious ends. But the young
rationalists, led by Narendra, refused to ascribe a supernatural cause
to a natural phenomenon. They believed that the Master\'s body, a
material thing, was subject, like all other material things, to physical
laws. Growth, development, decay, and death were laws of nature to which
the Master\'s body could not but respond. But though holding differing
views, they all believed that it was to him alone that they must look
for the attainment of their spiritual goal.

In spite of the physician\'s efforts and the prayers and nursing of the
devotees, the illness rapidly progressed. The pain sometimes appeared to
be unbearable. The Master lived only on liquid food, and his frail body
was becoming a mere skeleton. Yet his face always radiated joy, and he
continued to welcome the visitors pouring in to receive his blessing.
When certain zealous devotees tried to keep the visitors away, they were
told by Girish, \"You cannot succeed in it; he has been born for this
very purpose - to sacrifice himself for the redemption of others.\"

The more the body was devastated by illness, the more it became the
habitation of the Divine Spirit. Through its transparency the gods and
goddesses began to shine with ever increasing luminosity. On the day of
the Kāli Puja the devotees clearly saw in him the manifestation of the
Divine Mother.

It was noticed at this time that some of the devotees were making an
unbridled display of their emotions. A number of them, particularly
among the householders, began to cultivate, though at first
unconsciously, the art of shedding tears, shaking the body, contorting
the face, and going into trances, attempting thereby to imitate the
Master. They began openly to declare Sri Ramakrishna a Divine
Incarnation and to regard themselves as his chosen people, who could
neglect religious disciplines with impunity. Narendra\'s penetrating eye
soon sized up the situation. He found out that some of these external
manifestations were being carefully practised at home, while some were
the outcome of malnutrition, mental weakness, or nervous debility. He
mercilessly exposed the devotees who were pretending to have visions,
and asked all to develop a healthy religious spirit. Narendra sang
inspiring songs for the younger devotees, read with them the Imitation
of Christ and the Gita, and held before them the positive ideals of
spirituality.

**Last Days at Cossipore**

When Sri Ramakrishna\'s illness showed signs of aggravation, the
devotees, following the advice of Dr. Sarkār, rented a spacious garden
house at Cossipore, in the northern suburbs of Calcutta. The Master was
removed to this place on December 11, 1885.

It was at Cossipore that the curtain fell on the varied activities of
the Master\'s life on the physical plane. His soul lingered in the body
eight months more. It was the period of his great Passion, a constant
crucifixion of the body and the triumphant revelation of the Soul. Here
one sees the humanity and divinity of the Master passing and repassing
across a thin border line. Every minute of those eight months was
suffused with touching

tenderness of heart and breath-taking elevation of spirit. Every word he
uttered was full of pathos and sublimity.

It took the group only a few days to become adjusted to the new
environment. The Holy Mother, assisted by Sri Ramakrishna\'s niece,
Lakshmi Devi, and a few woman devotees, took charge of the cooking for
the Master and his attendants. Surendra willingly bore the major portion
of the expenses, other householders contributing according to their
means. Twelve disciples were constant attendants of the Master:
Narendra, Rākhāl, Bāburām, Niranjan, Jogin, Lātu, Tārak, the elder
Gopāl, Kāli, Śashi, Śarat, and the younger Gopāl. Sāradā, Harish, Hari,
Gangādhar, and Tulasi visited the Master from time to time and practised
sādhana at home. Narendra, preparing for his law examination, brought
his books to the garden house in order to continue his studies during
the infrequent spare moments. He encouraged his brother disciples to
intensify their meditation, scriptural studies, and other spiritual
disciplines. They all forgot their relatives and their worldly duties.

Among the attendants Śashi was the embodiment of service. He did not
practise meditation, japa, or any of the other disciplines followed by
his brother devotees. He was convinced that service to the guru was the
only religion for him. He forgot food and rest and was ever ready at the
Master\'s bedside.

Pundit Śaśadhar one day suggested to the Master that the latter could
remove the illness by concentrating his mind on the throat, the
scriptures having declared that yogis had power to cure themselves in
that way. The Master rebuked the pundit. \"For a scholar like you to
make such a proposal!\" he said. \"How can I withdraw the mind from the
Lotus Feet of God and turn it to this worthless cage of flesh and
blood?\" \"For our sake at least\", begged Narendra and the other
disciples. \"But\", replied Sri Ramakrishna, \"do you think I enjoy this
suffering? I wish to recover, but that depends on the Mother.\"

NARENDRA: \"Then please pray to Her. She must listen to you.\"

MASTER: \"But I cannot pray for my body.\"

NARENDRA: \"You must do it, for our sake at least.\"

MASTER: \"Very well, I shall try.\"

A few hours later the Master said to Narendra: \"I said to Her:
\'Mother, I cannot swallow food because of my pain. Make it possible for
me to eat a little.\' She pointed you all out to me and said: \'What?
You are eating enough through all these mouths. Isn\'t that so?\' I was
ashamed and could not utter another word.\" This dashed all the hopes of
the devotees for the Master\'s recovery.

\"I shall make the whole thing public before I go\", the Master had said
some time before. On January 1, 1886, he felt better and came down to
the garden for a little stroll. It was about three o\'clock in the
afternoon. Some thirty lay disciples were in the hall or sitting about
under the trees. Sri Ramakrishna said to Girish, \"Well, Girish, what
have you seen in me, that you proclaim me before everybody as an
Incarnation of God?\" Girish was not the man to be taken by surprise. He
knelt before the Master and said with folded hands, \"What can an
insignificant person like myself say about the One whose glory even
sages like Vyāsa and Vālmiki could not adequately measure?\" The Master
was profoundly moved. He said: \"What more shall I say? I bless you all.
Be illumined!\" He fell into a spiritual mood. Hearing these words the
devotees, one and all, became overwhelmed with emotion. They rushed to
him and fell at his feet. He touched them all, and each received an
appropriate benediction. Each of them, at the touch of the Master,
experienced ineffable bliss. Some laughed, some wept, some sat down to
meditate, some began to pray. Some saw light, some had visions of their
Chosen Ideals, and some felt within their bodies the rush of spiritual
power.

Narendra, consumed with a terrific fever for realization, complained to
the Master that all the others had attained peace and that he alone was
dissatisfied. The Master asked what he wanted. Narendra begged for
Samādhi, so that he might altogether forget the world for three or four
days at a time. \"You are a fool\", the Master rebuked him. \"There is a
state even higher than that. Isn\'t it you who sing, \'All that exists
art Thou\'? First of all settle your family affairs and then come to me.
You will experience a state even higher than Samādhi.\"

The Master did not hide the fact that he wished to make Narendra his
spiritual heir. Narendra was to continue the work after Sri
Ramakrishna\'s passing. Sri Ramakrishna said to him: \"I leave these
young men in your charge. See that they develop their spirituality and
do not return home.\" One day he asked the boys, in preparation for a
monastic life, to beg their food from door to door without thought of
caste. They hailed the Master\'s order and went out with begging-bowls.
A few days later he gave the ochre cloth of the sannyāsi to each of
them, including Girish, who was now second to none in his spirit of
renunciation. Thus the Master himself laid the foundation of the future
Ramakrishna Order of monks.

Sri Ramakrishna was sinking day by day. His diet was reduced to a
minimum and he found it almost impossible to swallow. He whispered to
M.: \"I am bearing all this cheerfully, for otherwise you would be
weeping. If you all say that it is better that the body should go rather
than suffer this torture, I am willing.\" The next morning he said to
his depressed disciples seated near the bed: \"Do you know what I see? I
see that God alone has become everything. Men and animals are only
frameworks covered with skin, and it is He who is moving through their
heads and limbs. I see that it is God Himself who has become the block,
the executioner, and the victim for the sacrifice.\" He fainted with
emotion. Regaining partial consciousness, he said: \"Now I have no pain.
I am very well.\" Looking at Lātu he said: \"There sits Lātu resting his
head on the palm of his hand. To me it is the Lord who is seated in that
posture.\"

The words were tender and touching. Like a mother he caressed Narendra
and Rākhāl, gently stroking their faces. He said in a half whisper to
M., \"Had this body been allowed to last a little longer, many more
souls would have been illumined.\" He paused a moment and then said:
\"But Mother has ordained otherwise. She will take me away lest, finding
me guileless and foolish, people should take advantage of me and
persuade me to bestow on them the rare gifts of spirituality.\" A few
minutes later he touched his chest and said: \"Here are two beings. One
is She and the other is Her devotee. It is the latter who broke his arm,
and it is he again who is now ill. Do you understand me?\" After a pause
he added: \"Alas! To whom shall I tell all this? Who will understand
me?\" \"Pain\", he consoled them again, \"is unavoidable as long as
there is a body. The Lord takes on the body for the sake of His
devotees.\"

Yet one is not sure whether the Master\'s soul actually was tortured by
this agonizing disease. At least during his moments of spiritual
exaltation - which became almost constant during the closing days of his
life on earth

23. he lost all consciousness of the body, of illness and suffering. One
    of his attendants said later on: \"While Sri Ramakrishna lay sick he
    never actually suffered pain. He would often say: \'O mind! Forget
    the body, forget the sickness, and remain merged in Bliss.\' No, he
    did not really suffer. At times, he would be in a state when the
    thrill of joy was clearly manifested in his body. Even when he could
    not speak he would let us know in some way that there was no
    suffering, and this fact was clearly evident to all who watched him.
    People who did not understand him thought that his suffering was
    very great. What spiritual joy he transmitted to us at that time!

Could such a thing have been possible if he had been suffering
physically? It was during this period that he taught us again these
truths. \'Brahman is always unattached. The three *gunās* are in It, but
It is unaffected by them, just as the wind carries odour yet remains
odourless.\' \'Brahman is Infinite Being, In finite Wisdom, Infinite
Bliss. In It there exist no delusion, no misery, no disease, no death,
no growth, no decay.\' \'The Transcendental Being and the being within
are one and the same. There is one indivisible Absolute Existence.\' \"

The Holy Mother secretly went to a Śiva temple across the Ganges to
intercede with the Deity for the Master\'s recovery. In a revelation she
was told to prepare herself for the inevitable end.

One day when Narendra was on the ground floor, meditating, the Master
was lying awake in his bed upstairs. In the depths of his meditation
Narendra felt as though a lamp were burning at the back of his head.
Suddenly he lost consciousness. It was the yearned-for, all-effacing
experience of nirvikalpa Samādhi, when the embodied soul realizes its
unity with the Absolute. After a very long time he regained partial
consciousness but was unable to find his body. He could see only his
head. \"Where is my body?\" he cried. The elder Gopāl entered the room
and said, \"Why, it is here, Naren!\" But Narendra could not find it.
Gopāl, frightened, ran upstairs to the Master. Sri Ramakrishna only
said: \"Let him stay that way for a time. He has worried me long

*Mahā--samādhi,*

enough.\"

After another long period Narendra regained full consciousness. Bathed
in peace, he went to the Master, who said: \"Now the Mother has shown
you everything. But this revelation will remain under lock and key, and
I shall keep the key. When you have accomplished the Mother\'s work you
will find the treasure again.\"

Some days later, Narendra being alone with the Master, Sri Ramakrishna
looked at him and went into Samādhi. Narendra felt the penetration of a
subtle force and lost all outer consciousness. Regaining presently the
normal mood, he found the Master weeping.

Sri Ramakrishna said to him: \"Today I have given you my all and I am
now only a poor fakir, possessing nothing. By this power you will do
immense good in the world, and not until it is accomplished will you
return.\" Henceforth the Master lived in the disciple.

Doubt, however, dies hard. After one or two days Narendra said to
himself, \"If in the midst of this racking physical pain he declares his
Godhead, then only shall I accept him as an Incarnation of God.\" He was
alone by the bedside of the Master. It was a passing thought, but the
Master smiled. Gathering his remaining strength, he distinctly said,
\"He who was Rāmā and Krishna is now, in this body, Ramakrishna - but
not in your Vedāntic sense.\" Narendra was stricken with shame.

**Mahā--samādhi**

Sunday, August 15, 1886. The Master\'s pulse became irregular. The
devotees stood by the bedside. Toward dusk Sri Ramakrishna had
difficulty in breathing. A short time afterwards he complained of
hunger. A little liquid food was put into his mouth; some of it he
swallowed, and the rest ran over his chin. Two attendants began to fan
him. All at once he went into Samādhi of a rather unusual type. The body
became stiff. Śaśi burst into tears. But after midnight the Master
revived. He was now very hungry and helped himself to a bowl of
porridge. He said he was strong again. He sat up against five or six
pillows, which were supported by the body of Śashi, who was fanning him.
Narendra took his feet on his lap and began to rub them. Again and
again, the Master repeated to him, \"Take care of these boys.\" Then, he
asked to lie down. Three times in ringing tones he cried the name of
**Kāli,** his life\'s Beloved, and lay back. At two minutes past one
there was a low sound in his throat and he fell a little to one side. A
thrill passed over his body. His hair stood on end. His eyes became

fixed on the tip of his nose. His face was lighted with a smile. The
final ecstasy began. It was total absorption, from which his mind never
returned. Narendra, unable to bear it, ran downstairs.

Dr. Sarkār arrived the following noon and pronounced that life had
departed not more than half an hour before. At five o\'clock the
Master\'s body was brought downstairs, laid on a cot, dressed in ochre
clothes, and decorated with sandal-past and flowers. A procession was
formed. The passers-by wept as the body was taken to the cremation
ground at the Bārānagore Ghāt on the Ganges.

While the devotees were returning to the garden house, carrying the urn
with the sacred ashes, a calm resignation came to their souls and they
cried, \"Victory unto the Guru!\"

The Holy Mother was weeping in her room, not for her husband, but
because she felt that Mother Kāli had left her. As she was about to put
off the marks of a Hindu widow, in a moment of revelation she heard the
words of faith \"I have only passed from one room to another.\"

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 1**

MASTER AND DISCIPLE

> February 1882

**M.\'s first visit to the Master**

IT WAS ON A SUNDAY in spring, a few days after Sri Ramakrishna\'s
birthday, that M. met him the first time. Sri Ramakrishna lived at the
Kailibari, the temple garden of Mother Kali, on the bank of the Ganges
at Dakshineswar.

M., being at leisure on Sundays, had gone with his friend Sidhu to visit
several gardens at Baranagore. As they were walking in Prasanna
Bannerji\'s garden, Sidhu said: \"There is a charming place on the bank
of the Ganges where a paramahamsa lives. Should you like to go there?\"
M. assented and they started immediately for the Dakshineswar temple
garden. They arrived at the main gate at dusk and went straight to Sri
Ramakrishna\'s room. And there they found him seated on a wooden couch,
facing the east. With a smile on his face he was talking of God. The
room was full of people, all seated on the floor, drinking in his words
in deep silence.

M. stood there speechless and looked on. It was as if he were standing
where all the holy places met and as if Sukadeva himself were speaking
the word of God, or as if Sri Chaitanya were singing the name and
glories of the Lord in Puri with Ramananda, Swarup, and the other
devotees.

**Formalities and essentials of religion**

Sri Ramakrishna said: \"When, hearing the name of Hari or Rāma once, you
shed tears and your hair stands on end, then you may know for certain
that you do not have to perform such devotions as the sandhya any more.
Then only will you have a right to renounce rituals; or rather, rituals
will drop away of themselves. Then it will be enough if you repeat only
the name of Rāma or Hari, or even simply Om.\" Continuing, he said,
\"The sandhya merges in the Gayatri, and the Gayatri merges in Om.\"

M. looked around him with wonder and said to himself: \"What a beautiful
place! What a charming man! How beautiful his words are! I have no wish
to move from this spot.\" After a few minutes he thought, \"Let me see
the place first; then I\'ll come back here and sit down.\"

As he left the room with Sidhu, he heard the sweet music of the evening
service arising in the temple from gong, bell, drum, and cymbal. He
could hear music from the nahabat, too, at the south end of the garden.
The sounds travelled over the Ganges, floating away and losing
themselves in the distance. A soft spring wind was blowing, laden with
the fragrance of flowers; the moon had just appeared. It was as if
nature and man together were preparing for the evening worship. M. and
Sidhu visited the twelve Siva temples, the Radhakanta temple, and the
temple of Bhavatarini. And as M. watched the services before the images
his heart was filled with joy.

On the way back to Sri Ramakrishna\'s room the two friends talked. Sidhu
told M. that the temple garden had been founded by Rani Rasmani. He said
that God was worshipped there daily as Kali, Krishna, and Siva, and that
within the gates sadhus and beggars were fed. When they reached Sri
Ramakrishna\'s door again, they found it shut, and Brinde, the Maid,
standing outside. M., who had been trained in English manners and would
not enter a room without permission, asked her, \"Is the holy man in?\"
Brinde replied, \"Yes he\'s in the room.\"

M: \"How long has he lived here?\"

BRINDE: \"Oh, he has been here a long time.\"

M: \"Does he read many books?\"

BRINDE: \"Books? Oh, dear no! They\'re all on his tongue.\"

M. had just finished his studies in college. It amazed him to hear that
Sri Ramakrishna read no books.

23. \"Perhaps it is time for his evening worship. May we go into the
    room? Will you tell him we are anxious to see him?\"

BRINDE: \"Go right in, children. Go in and sit down.\"

Entering the room, they found Sri Ramakrishna alone, seated on the
wooden couch. Incense had just been burnt and all the doors were shut.
As he entered, M. with folded hands saluted the Master. Then, at the
Master\'s bidding, he and Sidhu sat on the floor. Sri Ramakrishna asked
them: \"Where do you live? What is your occupation? Why have you come to
Baranagore?\" M. answered the questions, but he noticed that now and
then the Master seemed to become absent-minded. Later he learnt that
this mood is called bhava, ecstasy. It is like the state of the angler
who has been sitting with his rod: the fish comes and swallows the bait,
and the float begins to tremble; the angler is on the alert; he grips
the rod and watches the float steadily and eagerly; he will not speak to
anyone. Such was the state of Sri Ramakrishna\'s mind. Later M. heard,
and himself noticed, that Sri Ramakrishna would often go into this mood
after dusk, sometimes becoming totally unconscious of the outer world.

23. \"Perhaps you want to perform your evening worship. In that case may
    we take our leave?\" SRI RAMAKRISHNA (still in ecstasy):
    \"No-evening worship? No, it is not exactly that.\"

After a little conversation M. saluted the Master and took his leave.
\"Come again\", Sri Ramakrishna said.

On his way home M. began to wonder: \"Who is this serene-looking man who
is drawing me back to him? Is it possible for a man to be great without
being a scholar? How wonderful it is! I should like to see him again. He
himself said, \'Come again.\' I shall go tomorrow or the day after.\"

**Second visit**

M.\'s second visit to Sri Ramakrishna took place on the southeast
verandah at eight o\'clock in the morning. The Master was about to be
shaved, the barber having just arrived. As the cold season still
lingered he had put on a moleskin shawl bordered with red. Seeing M.,
the Master said: \"So you have come. That\'s good. Sit down here.\" He
was smiling. He stammered a little when he spoke.

SRI RAMAKRISHNA (to M.): \"Where do you live?\"

M: \"In Calcutta, sir.\"

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: \"Where are you staying here?\"

M: \"I am at Baranagore at my older sister\'s-Ishan Kaviraj\'s house.\"

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: \"Oh, at Ishan\'s? Well, how is Keshab now? He was very
ill.\"

M: \"Indeed, I have heard so too, but I believe he is well now.\"

**Master\'s love for Keshab**

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: \"I made a vow to worship the Mother with green coconut
and sugar on Keshab\'s recovery. Sometimes, in the early hours of the
morning, I would wake up and cry before Her: \'Mother, please make
Keshab well again. If Keshab doesn\'t live, whom shall I talk with when
I go to Calcutta?\' And so it was

that I resolved to offer Her the green coconut and sugar.

\"Tell me, do you know of a certain Mr. Cook who has come to Calcutta?
Is it true that he is giving lectures? Once Keshab took me on a steamer,
and this Mr. Cook, too was in the party.\"

23. \"Yes, sir, I have heard something like that; but I have never been
    to his lectures. I don\'t know much about him.\"

**Sri Ramakrishna on M.\'s marriage**

SRI RAMAKRISHNA: \"Pratap\'s brother came here. He stayed a few days. He
had nothing to do and said he wanted to live here. I came to know that
he had left his wife and children with his father-in-law. He has a whole
brood of them! So I took him to task. Just fancy! He is the father of so
many children! Will people from the neighbourhood feed them and bring
them up? He isn\'t even ashamed that someone else is feeding his wife
and children, and that they have been left at his father-in-law\'s
house. I scolded him very hard and asked him to look for a job. Then he
was willing to leave here.

\"Are you married?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

SRI RAMAKRISHNA (with a shudder): \"Oh, Ramlal! Alas, he is married!\"

Like one guilty of a terrible offence, M. sat motionless, his eyes fixed
on the ground. He thought, \"Is it such a wicked thing to get married?\"

The Master continued, \"Have you any children?\"

M. this time could hear the beating of his own heart. He whispered in a
trembling voice, \"Yes, sir, I have children.\"

Very sadly Sri Ramakrishna said, \"Ah me! He even has children!\"

Thus rebuked M. sat speechless. His pride had received a blow. After a
few minutes Sri Ramakrishna looked at him kindly and said
affectionately: \"You see, you have certain good signs. I know them by
looking at a person\'s forehead, his eyes, and so on. Tell me, now, what
kind of person is your wife? Has she spiritual attributes, or is she
under the power of avidya?\"

M: \"She is all right. But I am afraid she is ignorant.\"

MASTER (with evident displeasure): \"And you are a man of knowledge!\"

M. had yet to learn the distinction between knowledge and ignorance. Up
to this time his conception had been that one got knowledge from books
and schools. Later on he gave up this false conception. He was taught
that to know God is knowledge, and not to know Him, ignorance. When Sri
Ramakrishna exclaimed, \"And you are a man of knowledge!\", M.\'s ego
was again badly shocked.

**God with and without form**

MASTER: \"Well, do you believe in God with form or without form?\"

M., rather surprised, said to himself: \"How can one believe in God
without form when one believes in God with form? And if one believes in
God without form, how can one believe that God has a form? Can these two
contradictory ideas be true at the same time? Can a white liquid like
milk be black?\"

M: \"Sir, I like to think of God as formless.\"

MASTER: \"Very good. It is enough to have faith in either aspect. You
believe in God without form; that is quite all right. But never for a
moment think that this alone is true and all else false. Remember that
God with form is just as true as God without form. But hold fast to your
own conviction.\"

The assertion that both are equally true amazed M.; he had never learnt
this from his books. Thus his ego received a third blow; but since it
was not yet completely crushed, he came forward to argue with the Master
a little more.

**God and the clay image**

5888. \"Sir, suppose one believes in God with form. Certainly He is not
      the clay image!\" MASTER (interrupting): \"But why clay? It is an
      image of Spirit.\"

M. could not quite understand the significance of this \"image of
Spirit\". \"But, sir,\" he said to the Master, \"one should explain to
those who worship the clay image that it is not God, and that, while
worshipping it, they should have God in view and not the clay image. One
should not worship clay.\"

**God the only real teacher**

MASTER (sharply): \"That\'s the one hobby of you Calcutta people -
giving lectures and bringing others to the light! Nobody ever stops to
consider how to get the light himself. Who are you to teach others?

\"He who is the Lord of the Universe will teach everyone. He alone
teaches us, who has created this universe; who has made the sun and
moon, men and beasts, and all other beings; who has provided means for
their sustenance; who has given children parents and endowed them with
love to bring them up. The Lord has done so many things - will He not
show people the way to worship Him? If they need teaching, then He will
be the Teacher. He is our Inner Guide.

\"Suppose there is an error in worshipping the clay image; doesn\'t God
know that through it He alone is being invoked? He will he pleased with
that very worship. Why should you get a headache over it? You had better
try for knowledge and devotion yourself.\"

This time M. felt that his ego was completely crushed. He now said to
himself: \"Yes, he has spoken the truth. What need is there for me to
teach others? Have I known God? Do I really love Him? \'I haven\'t room
enough for myself in my bed, and I am inviting my friend to share it
with me!\' I know nothing about God, yet I am trying to teach others.
What a shame! How foolish I am! This is not mathematics or history or
literature, that one can teach it to others. No, this is the deep
mystery of God. What he says appeals to me.\"

This was M.\'s first argument with the Master, and happily his last.

MASTER: \"You were talking of worshipping the clay image. Even if the
image is made of clay, there is need for that sort of worship. God
Himself has provided different forms of worship. He who is the Lord of
the Universe has arranged all these forms to suit different men in
different stages of knowledge.

\"The mother cooks different dishes to suit the stomachs of her
different children. Suppose she has five children. If there is a fish to
cook, she prepares various dishes from it - pilau, pickled fish, fried
fish, and so on - to suit their different tastes and powers of
digestion.

\"Do you understand me?\"

Need of holy company & Meditation in solitude

M. (humbly): \"Yes, sir. How, sir, may we fix our minds on God?\"

MASTER: \"Repeat God\'s name and sing His glories, and keep holy
company; and now and then visit God\'s devotees and holy men. The mind
cannot dwell on God if it is immersed day and night in worldliness, in
worldly duties and responsibilities; it is most necessary to go into
solitude now and then and think of God. To fix the mind on God is very
difficult, in the beginning, unless one practises meditation in
solitude. When a tree is young it should be fenced all around; otherwise
it may be destroyed by cattle.

\"To meditate, you should withdraw within yourself or retire to a
secluded corner or to the forest. And you should always discriminate
between the Real and the unreal. God alone is real, the Eternal
Substance; all else is unreal, that is, impermanent. By discriminating
thus, one should shake off impermanent objects from the mind.\"

**God and worldly duties**

M. (humbly):\"How ought we to live in the world?\"

MASTER: \"Do all your duties, but keep your mind on God. Live with all -
with wife and children, father and mother - and serve them. Treat them
as if they were very dear to you, but know in your heart of hearts that
they do not belong to you.

\"A maidservant in the house of a rich man performs all the household
duties, but her thoughts are fixed on her own home in her native
village. She brings up her Master\'s children as if they were her own.
She even speaks of them as \'my Rāma\' or \'my Hari\'. But in her own
mind she knows very well that they do not belong to her at all.

\"The tortoise moves about in the water. But can you guess where her
thoughts are? There on the bank, where her eggs are lying. Do all your
duties in the world, but keep your mind on God.

\"If you enter the world without first cultivating love for God, you
will be entangled more and more. You will be overwhelmed with its
danger, its grief, its sorrows. And the more you think of worldly
things, the more you will be attached to them.

\"First rub your hands with oil and then break open the jack-fruit;
otherwise they will be smeared with its sticky milk. First secure the
oil of divine love, and then set your hands to the duties of the world.

\"But one must go into solitude to attain this divine love. To get
butter from milk you must let it set into curd in a secluded spot; if it
is too much disturbed, milk won\'t turn into curd. Next, you must put
aside all other duties, sit in a quiet spot, and churn the curd. Only
then do you get butter.

\"Further, by meditating on God in solitude the mind acquires knowledge,
dispassion, and devotion. But the very same mind goes downward if it
dwells in the world. In the world there is only one thought: \'woman and
gold\'.2

\"The world is water and the mind milk. If you pour milk into water they
become one; you cannot find the pure milk any more. But turn the milk
into curd and churn it into butter. Then, when that butter is placed in
water, it will float. So, practise spiritual discipline in solitude and
obtain the butter of knowledge and love. Even if you keep that butter in
the water of the world the two will not mix. The butter will float.

**Practice of discrimination**

\"Together with this, you must practise discrimination. \'Woman and
gold\' is impermanent. God is the only

Eternal Substance. What does a man get with money? Food, clothes, and a
dwelling-place - nothing more. You cannot realize God with its help.
Therefore money can never be the goal of life. That is the process of
discrimination. Do you understand?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. I recently read a Sanskrit play called Prabodha
Chandrodaya. It deals with discrimination.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, discrimination about objects. Consider - what is there in
money or in a beautiful body? Discriminate and you will find that even
the body of a beautiful woman consists of bones, flesh, fat, and other
disagreeable things. Why should a man give up God and direct his
attention to such things? Why should a man forget God for their sake?\"

**How to see God**

M: \"Is it possible to see God?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, certainly. Living in solitude now and then, repeating
God\'s name and singing His glories, and discriminating between the Real
and the unreal - these are the means to employ to see Him.\"

**Longing and yearning**

M: \"Under what conditions does one see God?\"

MASTER: \"Cry to the Lord with an intensely yearning heart and you will
certainly see Him. People shed a whole jug of tears for wife and
children. They swim in tears for money. But who weeps for God? Cry to
Him with a real cry.\"

The Master sang:

> *Cry to your Mother Syama , with a real cry, O mind!*
>
> *And how can She hold Herself from you?*
>
> *How can Syama stay away?*
>
> *How can your Mother Kali hold Herself away?*
>
> *O mind, if you are in earnest, bring Her an offering*
>
> *Of bel-leaves and hibiscus flowers;*
>
> *Lay at Her feet your offering*
>
> *And with it mingle the fragrant sandal-paste of Love.*

Continuing, he said: \"Longing is like the rosy dawn. After the dawn out
comes the sun. Longing is followed by the vision of God.

\"God reveals Himself to a devotee who feels drawn to Him by the
combined force of these three attractions: the attraction of worldly
possessions for the worldly man, the child\'s attraction for its mother,
and the husband\'s attraction for the chaste wife. If one feels drawn to
Him by the combined force of these three attractions, then through it
one can attain Him.

\"The point is, to love God even as the mother loves her child, the
chaste wife her husband, and the worldly man his wealth. Add together
these three forces of love, these three powers of attraction, and give
it all to God. Then you will certainly see Him.

\"It is necessary to pray to Him with a longing heart. The kitten knows
only how to call its mother, crying, \'Mew, mew!\' It remains satisfied
wherever its mother puts it. And the mother cat puts the kitten
sometimes in the kitchen, sometimes on the floor, and sometimes on the
bed. When it suffers it cries only, \'Mew, mew!\'

That\'s all it knows. But as soon as the mother hears this cry, wherever
she may be; she comes to the kitten.\"

**Third visit**

It was Sunday afternoon when M. came on his third visit to the Master.
He had been profoundly impressed by his first two visits to this
wonderful man. He had been thinking of the Master constantly, and of the
utterly simple way he explained the deep truths of the spiritual life.
Never before had he met such a man.

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch. The room was filled with
devotees,3 who had taken advantage of the holiday to come to see the
Master. M. had not yet become acquainted with any of them; so he took
his seat in a corner. The Master smiled as he talked with the devotees.

**Narendra**

He addressed his words particularly to a young man of nineteen, named
Narendranath, who was a college student and frequented the Sadharan
Brahmo Samaj. His eyes were bright, his words were full of spirit, and
he had the look of a lover of God.

**How the spiritually minded should look upon the worldly**

M. guessed that the conversation was about worldly men, who look down on
those who aspire to spiritual things. The Master was talking about the
great number of such people in the world, and about how to deal with
them.

MASTER (to Narendra): \"How do you feel about it? Worldly people say all
kinds of things about the spiritually minded. But look here! When an
elephant moves along the street, any number of curs and other small
animals may bark and cry after it; but the elephant doesn\'t even look
back at them. If people speak ill of you, what will you think of them?\"

NARENDRA: \"I shall think that dogs are barking at me.\"

**God in every being**

MASTER (Smiling): \"Oh, no! You mustn\'t go that far, my child!
(Laughter). God dwells in all beings. But you may be intimate only with
good people; you must keep away from the evil-minded. God is even in the
tiger; but you cannot embrace the tiger on that account. (Laughter). You
may say, \'Why run away from a tiger, which is also a manifestation of
God?\' The answer to that is: \'Those who tell you to run away are also
manifestations of God - and why shouldn\'t you listen to them?\'

**Parable of the \"elephant God\"**

\"Let me tell you a story. In a forest there lived a holy man who had
many disciples. One day he taught them to see God in all beings and,
knowing this, to bow low before them all. A disciple went to the forest
to gather wood for the sacrificial fire. Suddenly he heard an outcry:
\'Get out of the way! A mad elephant is coming!\' All but the disciple
of the holy man took to their heels. He reasoned that the elephant was
also God in another form. Then why should he run away from it? He stood
still, bowed before the animal, and began to sing its praises. The mahut
of the elephant was shouting: \'Run away! Run away!\' But the disciple
didn\'t move. The animal seized him with its trunk, cast him to one
side, and went on its way. Hurt and bruised, the disciple lay
unconscious on the ground. Hearing what had happened, his teacher and
his brother disciples came to him and carried him to the hermitage. With
the help of some medicine he soon regained consciousness. Someone asked
him, \'You knew the elephant was coming - why didn\'t you leave the
place?\' \'But\', he said, \'our teacher

has told us that God Himself has taken all these forms, of animals as
well as men. Therefore, thinking it was only the elephant God that was
coming, I didn\'t run away.\' At this the teacher said: \'Yes, my child,
it is true that the elephant God was coming; but the mahut God forbade
you to stay there. Since all are manifestations of God, why didn\'t you
trust the mahut\'s words? You should have heeded the words of the mahut
God.\' (Laughter)

\"It is said in the scriptures that water is a form of God. But some
water is fit to be used for worship, some water for washing the face,
and some only for washing plates or dirty linen. This last sort cannot
be used for drinking or for a holy purpose. In like manner, God
undoubtedly dwells in the hearts of all - holy and unholy, righteous and
unrighteous; but a man should not have dealings with the unholy, the
wicked, the impure. He must not be intimate with them. With some of them
he may exchange words, but with others he shouldn\'t go even that far.
He should keep aloof from such people.\"

**How to deal with the wicked**

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, if a wicked man is about to do harm, or actually does
so, should we keep quiet then?\"

MASTER: \"A man living in society should make a show of tamas to protect
himself from evil-minded people.

But he should not harm anybody in anticipation of harm likely to be done
him.

**Parable of the snake**

\"Listen to a story. Some cowherd boys used to tend their cows in a
meadow where a terrible poisonous snake lived. Everyone was on the alert
for fear of it. One day a brahmachari was going along the meadow. The
boys ran to him and said: \'Revered sir, please don\'t go that way. A
venomous snake lives over there.\' \'What of it, my good children?\'
said the brahmachari. \'I am not afraid of the snake. I know some
mantras.\' So saying, he continued on his way along the meadow. But the
cowherd boys, being afraid, did not accompany him. In the mean time the
snake moved swiftly toward him with upraised hood. As soon as it came
near, he recited a mantra, and the snake lay at his feet like an
earthworm. The brahmachari said: \'Look here. Why do you go about doing
harm? Come, I will give you a holy word. By repeating it you will learn
to love God. Ultimately you will realize Him and so get rid of your
violent nature.\' Saying this, he taught the snake a holy word and
initiated him into spiritual life. The snake bowed before the teacher
and said, \'Revered sir, how shall I practise spiritual discipline?\'
\'Repeat that sacred word\', said the teacher, \'and do no harm to
anybody\'. As he was about to depart, the brahmachari said, \'I shall
see you again.\'

\"Some days passed and the cowherd boys noticed that the snake would not
bite. They threw stones at it. Still it showed no anger; it behaved as
if it were an earthworm. One day one of the boys came close to it,
caught it by the tail, and, whirling it round and round, dashed it again
and again on the ground and threw it away. The snake vomited blood and
became unconscious. It was stunned. It could not move. So, thinking it
dead, the boys went their way.

\"Late at night the snake regained consciousness. Slowly and with great
difficulty it dragged itself into its hole; its bones were broken and it
could scarcely move. Many days passed. The snake became a mere skeleton
covered with a skin. Now and then, at night, it would come out in search
of food. For fear of the boys it would not leave its hole during the
day-time. Since receiving the sacred word from the teacher, it had given
up doing harm to others. It maintained its life on dirt, leaves, or the
fruit that dropped from the trees.

\"About a year later the brahmachari came that way again and asked after
the snake. The cowherd boys told him that it was dead. But he couldn\'t
believe them. He knew that the snake would not die before attaining the
fruit of the holy word with which it had been initiated. He found his
way to the place and, searching here and there, called it by the name he
had given it. Hearing the teacher\'s voice, it came out of its hole and
bowed before him with great reverence. \'How are you?\' asked the
brahmachari. \'I am well, sir\', replied the

snake. \'But\', the teacher asked, \'why are you so thin?\' The snake
replied: \'Revered sir, you ordered me not to harm any body. So I have
been living only on leaves and fruit. Perhaps that has made me
thinner.\'

\"The snake had developed the quality of sattva; it could not be angry
with anyone. It had totally forgotten that the cowherd boys had almost
killed it.

\"The brahmachari said: \'It can\'t be mere want of food that has
reduced you to this state. There must be some other reason. Think a
little.\' Then the snake remembered that the boys had dashed it against
the ground. It said: \'Yes, revered sir, now I remember. The boys one
day dashed me violently against the ground. They are ignorant, after
all. They didn\'t realize what a great change had come over my mind. How
could they know I wouldn\'t bite or harm anyone?\' The brahmachari
exclaimed: \'What a shame! You are such a fool! You don\'t know how to
protect yourself. I asked you not to bite, but I didn\'t forbid you to
hiss. Why didn\'t you scare them by hissing?\'

\"So you must hiss at wicked people. You must frighten them lest they
should do you harm. But never inject your venom into them. One must not
injure others.

\"In this creation of God there is a variety of things: men, animals,
trees, plants. Among the animals some are good, some bad. There are
ferocious animals like the tiger. Some trees bear fruit sweet as nectar,
and others bear fruit that is poisonous. Likewise, among human beings,
there are the good and the wicked, the holy and the unholy. There are
some who are devoted to God, and others who are attached to the world.

**Four classes of men**

\"Men may be divided into four classes: those bound by the fetters of
the world, the seekers after liberation, the liberated, and the
ever-free.

\"Among the ever-free we may count sages like Narada. They live in the
world for the good of others, to teach men spiritual truth.

\"Those in bondage are sunk in worldliness and forgetful of God. Not
even by mistake do they think of God.

\"The seekers after liberation want to free themselves from attachment
to the world. Some of them succeed and others do not.

\"The liberated souls, such as the sadhus and mahatmas, are not
entangled in the world, in \'woman and gold\'.

Their minds are free from worldliness. Besides, they always meditate on
the Lotus Feet of God.

\"Suppose a net has been cast into a lake to catch fish. Some fish are
so clever that they are never caught in the net. They are like the
ever-free. But most of the fish are entangled in the net. Some of them
try to free themselves from it, and they are like those who seek
liberation. But not all the fish that struggle succeed. A very few do
jump out of the net, making a big splash in the water. Then the
fishermen shout, \'Look! There goes a big one!\' But most of the fish
caught in the net cannot escape, nor do they make any effort to get out.
On the contrary, they burrow into the mud with the net in their mouths
and lie there quietly, thinking, \'We need not fear any more; we are
quite safe here.\' But the poor things do not know that the fishermen
will drag them out with the net. These are like the men bound to the
world.

\"The bound souls are tied to the world by the fetters of \'woman and
gold\'. They are bound hand and foot. Thinking that \'woman and gold\'
will make them happy and give them security, they do not realize that it
will lead them to annihilation. When a man thus bound to the world is
about to die, his wife asks, \'You are about to go; but what have you
done for me?\' Again, such is his attachment to the things of the world
that, when he sees the lamp burning brightly, he says: \'Dim the light.
Too much oil is being used.\' And he is on his death-bed!

\"The bound souls never think of God. If they get any leisure they
indulge in idle gossip and foolish talk, or they engage in fruitless
work. If you ask one of them the reason, he answers, \'Oh, I cannot keep
still; so I am making a hedge.\' When time hangs heavy on their hands
they perhaps start playing cards.\"

There was deep silence in the room.

**Redeeming power of faith**

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, is there no help, then, for such a worldly person?\"

MASTER: \"Certainly there is. From time to time he should live in the
company of holy men, and from time to time go into solitude to meditate
on God. Furthermore, he should practise discrimination and pray to God,
\'Give me faith and devotion.\' Once a person has faith he has achieved
everything. There is nothing greater than faith.

(To Kedar) \"You must have heard about the tremendous power of faith. It
is said in the purana that Rāma, who was God Himself - the embodiment of
Absolute Brahman - had to build a bridge to cross the sea to Ceylon. But
Hanuman, trusting in Rama\'s name, cleared the sea in one jump and
reached the other side. He had no need of a bridge. (All laugh)

\"Once a man was about to cross the sea. Bibhishana wrote Rama\'s name
on a leaf, tied it in a corner of the man\'s wearing-cloth, and said to
him: \'Don\'t be afraid. Have faith and walk on the water. But look
here - the moment you lose faith you will be drowned.\' The man was
walking easily on the water. Suddenly he had an intense desire to see
what was tied in his cloth. He opened it and found only a leaf with the
name of Rāma written on it. \'What is this?\' he thought. \'Just the
name of Rāma!\' As soon as doubt entered his mind he sank under the
water.

\"If a man has faith in God, then even if he has committed the most
heinous sins - such as killing a cow, a brahmin, or a woman - he will
certainly be saved through his faith. Let him only say to God, \'O Lord,
I Will not repeat such an action\', and he need not be afraid of
anything.\"

When he had said this, the Master sang:

> *If only I can pass away repeating Durga\'s name,*
>
> *How canst Thou then, O Blessed One,*
>
> *Withhold from me deliverance,*
>
> *Wretched though I may be?*
>
> *1 may have stolen a drink of wine, or killed a child unborn, Or slain
> a woman or a cow,*
>
> *Or even caused a brahmin\'s death;*
>
> *But, though it all be true,*
>
> *Nothing of this can make me feel the least uneasiness;*
>
> *For through the power of Thy sweet name*
>
> *My wretched soul may still aspire*
>
> *Even to Brahmanhood.*

**Parable of the homa bird**

Pointing to Narendra, the Master said: \"You all see this boy. He
behaves that way here. A naughty boy seems very gentle when with his
father. But he is quite another person when he plays in the chandni.
Narendra and people of his type belong to the class of the ever-free.
They are never entangled in the world. When they grow a little older
they feel the awakening of inner consciousness and go directly toward
God. They come to the world only to teach others. They never care for
anything of the world. They are never attached to \'woman and gold\'.

\"The Vedas speak of the homa bird. It lives high up in the sky and
there it lays its egg. As soon as the egg is laid it begins to fall; but
it is so high up that it continues to fall for many days. As it falls it
hatches, and the chick falls. As the chick falls its eyes open; it grows
wings. As soon as its eyes open, it realizes that it is falling and will
be dashed to pieces on touching the earth. Then it at once shoots up
toward the mother bird high in the sky.\"

At this point Narendra left the room. Kedar, Prankrishna, M., and many
others remained.

**Master praises Narendra**

MASTER: \"You see, Narendra excels in singing, playing on instruments,
study, and everything. The other day he had a discussion with Kedar and
tore his arguments to shreds. (All laugh.)

(To M.) \"Is there any book in English on reasoning?\"

23. \"Yes, sir, there is. It is called Logic.\" MASTER: \"Tell me what
    it says.\"

M. was a little embarrassed. He said: \"One part of the book deals with
deduction from the general to the

particular. For example: All men are mortal. Scholars are men. Therefore
scholars are mortal. Another part

deals with the method of reasoning from the particular to the general.
For example: This crow is black. That crow is black. The crows we see
everywhere are black. Therefore all crows are black. But there may be a
fallacy in a conclusion arrived at in this way; for on inquiry one may
find a white crow in some country. There is another illustration: If
there is rain, there is, or has been, a cloud. Therefore rain comes from
a cloud. Still another example: This man has thirty-two teeth. That man
has thirty-two teeth. All the men we see have thirty-two teeth.
Therefore men have thirty-two teeth. English logic deals with such
inductions and deductions.\"

Sri Ramakrishna barely heard these words. While listening he became
absent-minded. So the conversation did not proceed far.

When the meeting broke up, the devotees sauntered in the temple garden.
M. went in the direction of the Panchavati. It was about five o\'clock
in the afternoon. After a while he returned to the Master\'s room.
There, on the small north verandah, he witnessed an amazing sight.

Sri Ramakrishna was standing still, surrounded by a few devotees, and
Narendra was singing. M. had never heard anyone except the Master sing
so sweetly. When he looked at Sri Ramakrishna he was struck with wonder;
for the Master stood motionless, with eyes transfixed. He seemed not
even to breathe. A devotee told M. that the Master was in samadhi. M.
had never before seen or heard of such a thing. Silent with wonder, he
thought: \"Is it possible for a man to be so oblivious of the outer
world in the consciousness of God? How deep his faith and devotion must
be to bring about such a state!\"

Narendra was singing:

> *Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord Hari,*
>
> *The Stainless One, Pure Spirit through and through.*
>
> *How peerless is the Light that in Him shines!*
>
> *How soul-bewitching is His wondrous form!*
>
> *How dear is He to all His devotees!*
>
> *Ever more beauteous in fresh-blossoming love*
>
> *That shames the splendour of a million moons,*
>
> *Like lightning gleams the glory of His form,*
>
> *Raising erect the hair for very joy.*

The Master shuddered when this last line was sung. His hair stood on
end, and tears of joy streamed down his cheeks. Now and then his lips
parted in a smile. Was he seeing the peerless beauty of God, \"that
shames the splendour of a million moons\"? Was this the vision of God,
the Essence of Spirit? How much austerity and discipline, how much faith
and devotion, must be necessary for such a vision!

The song went on:

> *Worship His feet in the lotus of your heart;*
>
> *With mind serene and eyes made radiant*
>
> *With heavenly love, behold that matchless sight.*

Again that bewitching smile. The body motionless as before, the eyes
half Shut, as if beholding a strange inner vision.

The song drew to a close. Narendra sang the last lines:

> *Caught in the spell of His love\'s ecstasy,*
>
> *Immerse yourself for evermore, O mind\"*
>
> *In Him who is Pure Knowledge and Pure Bliss.*

The sight of the samadhi, and the divine bliss he had witnessed, left an
indelible impression on M.\'s mind. He returned home deeply moved. Now
and then he could hear within himself the echo of those
soul-intoxicating lines:

> *Immerse yourself for evermore, O mind,*
>
> *In Him who is Pure Knowledge and Pure Bliss.*

**Fourth visit**

The next day, too, was a holiday for M. He arrived at Dakshineswar at
three o\'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna was in his room;
Narendra, Bhavanath, and a few other devotees were sitting on a mat
spread on the floor. They were all young men of nineteen or twenty.
Seated on the small couch, Sri Ramakrishna was talking with them and
smiling.

No sooner had M. entered the room than the Master laughed aloud and said
to the boys, \"There! He has come again.\" They all joined in the
laughter. M. bowed low before him and took a seat. Before this he had
saluted the Master with folded hands, like one with an English
education. But that day he learnt to fall down at his feet in orthodox
Hindu fashion.

**The peacock and the opium**

Presently the Master explained the cause of his laughter to the
devotees, He said: \"A man once fed a peacock with a pill of opium at
four o\'clock in the afternoon. The next day, exactly at that time, the
peacock came back. It had felt the intoxication of the drug and returned
just in time to have another dose.\"(All laugh.)

M. thought this a very apt Ramakrishna for a moment. he should go again.

illustration. Even at home he had been unable to banish the thought of
Sri His mind was constantly at Dakshineswar and he had counted the
minutes until

In the mean time the Master was having great fun with the boys, treating
them as if they were his most intimate friends. Peals of side-splitting
laughter filled the room, as if it were a mart of joy. The whole thing
was a revelation to M. He thought: \"Didn\'t I see him only yesterday
intoxicated with God? Wasn\'t he swimming then in the Ocean of Divine
Love - a sight I had never seen before? And today the same person is
behaving like an ordinary man! Wasn\'t it he who scolded me on the first
day of my coming here? Didn\'t he admonish me, saying, \'And you are a
man of knowledge!\'? Wasn\'t it he who said to me that God with form is
as true as God without form? Didn\'t he tell me that God alone is real
and all else illusory? Wasn\'t it he who advised me

to live in the world unattached, like a maidservant in a rich man\'s
house?\"

Sri Ramakrishna was having great fun with the young devotees; now and
then he glanced at M. He noticed that M. sat in silence. The Master said
to Ramlal: \"You see, he is a little advanced in years, and therefore
somewhat serious. He sits quiet while the youngsters are making merry.\"
M. was then about twenty-eight years old.

**Hanuman\'s devotion to Rāma**

The conversation drifted to Hanuman, whose picture hung on the wall in
the Master\'s room.

Sri Ramakrishna said: \"Just imagine Hanuman\'s state of mind. He
didn\'t care for money, honour, creature comforts, or anything else. He
longed only for God. When he was running away with the heavenly weapon
that had been secreted in the crystal pillar, Mandodari began to tempt
him with various fruits so that he might come down and drop the weapon.5
But he couldn\'t be tricked so easily. In reply to her persuasions he
sang this song:

> *Am I in need of fruit?*
>
> *I have the Fruit that makes this life*
>
> *Fruitful indeed. Within my heart*
>
> *The Tree of Rāma grows,*
>
> *Bearing salvation for its fruit.*
>
> *Under the Wish-fulfilling Tree*
>
> *Of Rāma do I sit at ease,*
>
> *Plucking whatever fruit I will.*
>
> *But if you speak of fruit -*
>
> *No beggar, I, for common fruit.*
>
> *Behold, I go,*
>
> *Leaving a bitter fruit for you.\"*

As Sri Ramakrishna was singing the song he went into samadhi. Again the
half-closed eyes and motionless body that one sees in his photograph.
Just a minute before, the devotees had been making merry in his company.
Now all eyes were riveted on him. Thus for the second time M. saw the
Master in samadhi.

After a long time the Master came back to ordinary consciousness. His
face lighted up with a smile, and his body relaxed; his senses began to
function in a normal way. He shed tears of joy as he repeated the holy
name of Rāma. M. wondered whether this very saint was the person who a
few minutes earlier had been behaving like a child of five.

The Master said to Narendra and M., \"I should like to hear you speak
and argue in English.\" They both laughed. But they continued to talk in
their mother tongue. It was impossible for M. to argue any more before
the Master. Though Ramakrishna insisted, they did not talk in English.

At five o\'clock in the afternoon all the devotees except Narendra and
M. took leave of the Master. As M. was walking in the temple garden, he
suddenly came upon the Master talking to Narendra on the bank of the
goose-pond. Sri Ramakrishna said to Narendra: \"Look here. Come a little
more often. You are a new-comer. On first acquaintance people visit each
other quite often, as is the case with a lover and his sweetheart.
(Narendra and M. laugh.) So please come, won\'t you?\"

Narendra, a member of the Brahmo Samaj, was very particular about his
promises. He said with a smile, \"Yes, sir, I shall try.\"

As they were returning to the Master\'s room, Sri Ramakrishna said to
M.: \"When peasants go to market to buy bullocks for their ploughs, they
can easily tell the good from the bad by touching their tails. On being
touched

there, some meekly lie down on the ground. The peasants recognize that
these are without mettle and so reject them. They select only those
bullocks that frisk about and show spirit when their tails are touched.
Narendra is like a bullock of this latter class. He is full of spirit
within.\"

The Master smiled as he said this, and continued: \"There are some
people who have no grit whatever. They are like flattened rice soaked in
milk - soft and mushy. No inner strength!\"

It was dusk. The Master was meditating on God. He said to M.: \"Go and
talk to Narendra. Then tell me what you think of him.\"

Evening worship was over in the temples. M. met Narendra on the bank of
the Ganges and they began to converse. Narendra told M. about his
studying in college, his being a member of the Brahmo Samaj, and so on.

It was now late in the evening and time for M.\'s departure; but he felt
reluctant to go and instead went in search of Sri Ramakrishna. He had
been fascinated by the Master\'s singing and wanted to hear more. At
last he found the Master pacing alone in the natmandir in front of the
Kali temple. A lamp was burning in the temple on either side of the
image of the Divine Mother. The single lamp in the spacious natmandir
blended light and darkness into a kind of mystic twilight, in which the
figure of the Master could be dimly seen.

M. had been enchanted by the Master\'s sweet music. With some hesitation
he asked him whether there would be any more singing that evening. \"No,
not tonight\", said Sri Ramakrishna after a little reflection. Then, as
if remembering something, he added: \"But I\'m going soon to Balarām
Bose\'s house in Calcutta. Come there and you\'ll hear me sing.\" M.
agreed to go.

MASTER. \"Do you know Balarām Bose?\"

M: \"No, sir. I don\'t.\"

MASTER: \"He lives in Bosepara.\"

M: \"Well, sir, I shall find him.\"

As Sri Ramakrishna walked up and down the hall with M., he said to him:
\"Let me ask you something. What do you think of me?\"

M. remained silent. Again Sri Ramakrishna asked: \"What do you think of
me? How many annas of knowledge of God have I?\"

5888. \"I don\'t understand what you mean by \'annas\'. But of this I am
      sure: I have never before seen such knowledge, ecstatic love,
      faith in God, renunciation, and catholicity anywhere.\"

The Master laughed.

M. bowed low before him and took his leave. He had gone as far as the
main gate of the temple garden when he suddenly remembered something and
came back to Sri Ramakrishna, who was still in the natmandir. In the dim
light the Master, all alone, was pacing the hall, rejoicing in the Self
as the lion lives and roams alone in the forest.

In silent wonder M. surveyed that great soul.

MASTER (to M.): \"What makes you come back?\"

1.  \"Perhaps the house you asked me to go to belongs to a rich man.
    They may not let me in. I think I had better not go. I would rather
    meet you here.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, no! Why should you think that? Just mention my name. Say
that you want to see me; then someone will take you to me.\"

M. nodded his assent and, after saluting the Master, took his leave.

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 2**

IN THE COMPANY OF DEVOTEES

> March 11, 1882

**Master at Balaram\'s house**

ABOUT EIGHT O\'CLOCK in the morning Sri Ramakrishna went as planned to
Balaram Bose\'s house in Calcutta. It was the day of the Dolayatra. Ram,
Manomohan, Rakhal, Nityagopal, and other devotees were with him. M.,
too, came, as bidden by the Master.

**Devotees in trance**

The devotees and the Master sang and danced in a state of divine
fervour. Several of them were in an ecstatic mood. Nityagopal\'s chest
glowed with the upsurge of emotion, and Rakhal lay on the floor in
ecstasy, completely unconscious of the world. The Master put his hand on
Rakhal\'s chest and said: \"Peace. Be quiet.\" This was Rakhal\'s first
experience of ecstasy. He lived with his father in Calcutta and now and
then visited the Master at Dakshineswar. About this time he had studied
a short while in Vidyasagar\'s school at Syampukur.

When the music was over, the devotees sat down for their meal. Balaram
stood there humbly, like a servant. Nobody would have taken him for the
master of the house. M. was still a stranger to the devotees, having met
only Narendra at Dakshineswar.

A few days later M. visited the Master at Dakshineswar. It was between
four and five o\'clock in the afternoon. The Master and he were sitting
on the steps of the Śiva temples. Looking at the temple of Radhakanta,
across the courtyard, the Master went into an ecstatic mood.

Since his nephew Hriday\'s dismissal from the temple, Sri Ramakrishna
had been living without an attendant. On account of his frequent
spiritual moods he could hardly take care of himself. The lack of an
attendant caused him great inconvenience.

**Bigotry condemned**

Sri Ramakrishna was talking to Kāli, the Divine Mother of the Universe.
He said: \"Mother, everyone says, \'My watch alone is right.\' The
Christians, the Brahmos, the Hindus, the Mussalmans, all say, \'My
religion alone is true.\' But, Mother, the fact is that nobody\'s watch
is right. Who can truly understand Thee? But if a man prays to Thee with
a yearning heart, he can reach Thee, through Thy grace, by any path.
Mother, show me some time how the Christians pray to Thee in their
churches. But Mother, what will people say if I go in? Suppose they make
a fuss! Suppose they don\'t allow me to enter the Kāli temple again!
Well then, show me the Christian worship from the door of the church.\"

**The mind\'s inability to comprehend God**

Another day the Master was seated on the small couch in his room, with
his usual beaming countenance. M. arrived with Kalikrishna, who did not
know where his friend M. was taking him. He had only been told: \"If you
want to see a grog-shop, then come with me. You will see a huge jar of
wine there.\" M. related this to Sri Ramakrishna, who laughed about it.
The Master said: \"The bliss of worship and communion with God is the
true wine, the wine of ecstatic love. The goal of human life is to love
God, Bhakti is the one essential thing. To know God through jnāna and
reasoning is extremely difficult.\"

Then the Master sang:

> *Who is there that can understand what Mother Kāli is?*
>
> *Even the six darsanas are powerless to reveal Her\....*

The Master said, again: \"The one goal of life is to cultivate love for
God, the love that the milkmaids, the milkmen, and the cowherd boys of
Vrindāvan felt for Krishna. When Krishna went away to Mathura, the
cowherds roamed about weeping bitterly because of their separation from
Him.\"

Saying this the Master sang, with his eyes turned upward:

> *Just now I saw a youthful cowherd*
>
> *With a young calf in his arms;*
>
> *There he stood, by one hand holding*
>
> *The branch of a young tree.*
>
> *\"Where are You, Brother Kanai?\" he cried;*
>
> *But \"Kanai\" scarcely could he utter;*
>
> *\"Ka\" was as much as he could say.*
>
> *He cried, \"Where are You, Brother?\"*
>
> *And his eyes were filled with tears.*

When M. heard this song of the Master\'s, laden with love, his eyes were
moist with tears.

**April 2, 1882**

**Master\'s visit to Keshab**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting in the drawing-room of Keshab Chandra Sen\'s
house in Calcutta; it was five o\'clock in the afternoon. When Keshab
was told of his arrival, he came to the drawing-room dressed to go out,
for he was about to call on a sick friend. Now he cancelled his plan.
The Master said to him: \"You have so many things to attend to. Besides,
you have to edit a newspaper. You have no time to come to Dakshineswar;
so I have come to see you. When I heard of your illness I vowed green
coconut and sugar to the Divine Mother for your recovery. I said to Her,
\'Mother, if something happens to Keshab, with whom shall I talk in
Calcutta?\' \"

Sri Ramakrishna spoke to Pratap and the other Brahmo devotees. M. was
seated near by. Pointing to him, the Master said to Keshab: \"Will you
please ask him why he doesn\'t come to Dakshineswar any more? He
repeatedly tells me he is not attached to his wife and children.\" M.
had been paying visits to the Master for about a month; his absence for
a time from Dakshineswar called forth this remark. Sri Ramakrishna had
asked M. to write to him, if his coming were delayed.

Pundit Samadhyayi was present. The Brahmo devotees introduced him to Sri
Ramakrishna as a scholar well versed in the Vedas and the other
scriptures. The Master said, \"Yes, I can see inside him through his
eyes, as one can see the objects in a room through the glass door.\"

Trailokya sang. Suddenly the Master stood up and went into samādhi,
repeating the Mother\'s name. Coming down a little to the plane of sense
consciousness, he danced and sang:

> *I drink no ordinary wine, but Wine of Everlasting Bliss,*
>
> *As I repeat my Mother Kāli\'s name;*
>
> *It so intoxicates my mind that people take me to be drunk!*
>
> *First my guru gives molasses for the making of the Wine;*
>
> *My longing is the ferment to transform it.*
>
> *Knowledge, the maker of the Wine, prepares it for me then;*
>
> *And when it is done, my mind imbibes it from the bottle of the
> mantra,*
>
> *Taking the Mother\'s name to make it pure.*
>
> *Drink of this Wine, says Ramprasad, and the four fruits of life are
> yours.*

The Master looked at Keshab tenderly, as if Keshab were his very own. He
seemed to fear that Keshab might belong to someone else, that is to say,
that he might become a worldly person. Looking at him, the Master sang
again:

> *We are afraid to speak, and yet we are afraid to keep still;*
>
> *Our minds, O Radha, half believe that we are about to lose you!*
>
> *We tell you the secret that we know -*
>
> *The secret whereby we ourselves, and others, with our help,*
>
> *Have passed through many a time of peril;*
>
> *Now it all depends on you.*

Quoting the last part of the song, he said to Keshab: \"That is to say,
renounce everything and call on God. He alone is real; all else is
illusory. Without the realization of God everything is futile. This is
the great secret.\"

The Master sat down again and began to converse with the devotees. For a
while he listened to a piano recital, enjoying it like a child. Then he
was taken to the inner apartments, where he was served with refreshments
and the ladies saluted him.

As the Master was leaving Keshab\'s house, the Brahmo devotees
accompanied him respectfully to his carriage.

**Sunday, April 9, 1882**

Sri Ramakrishna was seated with his devotees in the drawing-room of
Prankrishna Mukherji\'s house in Calcutta; it was between one and two
o\'clock in the afternoon. Since Colonel Viswanath4 lived in that
neighbourhood, the Master intended to visit him before going to see
Keshab at the Lily Cottage. A number of neighbours and other friends of
Prankrishna had been invited to meet Sri Ramakrishna. They were all
eager to hear his words.

**God and His glory & Dangers of worldly life**

MASTER: \"God and His glory. This universe is His glory. People see His
glory and forget everything. They do not seek God, whose glory is this
world. All seek to enjoy \'woman and gold\'. But there is too much
misery and worry in that. This world is like the whirlpool of the
Viśālākśi. Once a boat gets into it there is no hope of its rescue.
Again, the world is like a thorny bush: you have hardly freed yourself
from one set of thorns before you find yourself entangled in another.
Once you enter a labyrinth you find it very difficult to get out. Living
in the world, a man becomes seared, as it were.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Then what is the way, sir?\"

**Prayer and holy company & Earnest longing**

MASTER: \"Prayer and the company of holy men. You cannot get rid of an
ailment without the help of a physician. But it is not enough to be in
the company of religious people only for a day. You should constantly
seek it, for the disease has become chronic. Again, you can\'t
understand the pulse rightly unless you live with a physician. Moving
with him constantly, you learn to distinguish between the pulse of
phlegm and the pulse of bile.\"

DEVOTEE: \"What is the good of holy company?\"

MASTER: \"It begets yearning for God. It begets love of God. Nothing
whatsoever is achieved in spiritual life without yearning. By constant
living in the company of holy men, the soul becomes restless for God.
This yearning is like the state of mind of a man who has someone ill in
the family. His mind is in a state of perpetual restlessness, thinking
how the sick person may be cured. Or again, one should feel a yearning
for God like the yearning of a man who has lost his job and is wandering
from one office to another in search of work. If he is rejected at a
certain place which has no vacancy, he goes there again the next day and
inquires, \'Is there an vacancy today?\'

\"There is another way: earnestly praying to God. God is our very own.
We should say to Him: \'O God, what is Thy nature? Reveal Thyself to me.
Thou must show Thyself to me; for why else hast Thou created me?\' Some
Sikh devotees once said to me, \'God is full of compassion.\' I said:
\'But why should we call Him compassionate? He is our Creator. What is
there to be wondered at if He is kind to us? Parents bring up their
children. Do you call that an act of kindness? They must act that way.\'
Therefore we should force our demands on God. He is our Father and
Mother, isn\'t He? If the son demands his patrimony and gives up food
and drink in order to enforce his demand, then the parents hand his
share over to him three years before the legal time. Or when

the child demands some pice from his mother, and says over and over
again: \'Mother, give me a couple of pice. I beg you on my knees!\' -
then the mother, seeing his earnestness, and unable to bear it any more,
tosses the money to him.

\"There is another benefit from holy company. It helps one cultivate
discrimination between the Real and the unreal. God alone is the Real,
that is to say, the Eternal Substance, and the world is unreal, that is
to say, transitory. As soon as a man finds his mind wandering away to
the unreal, he should apply discrimination. The moment an elephant
stretches out its trunk to eat a plantain-tree in a neighbour\'s garden,
it gets a blow from the iron goad of the driver.\"

**Explanation of evil**

A NEIGHBOUR: \"Why does a man have sinful tendencies?\"

MASTER: \"In God\'s creation there are all sorts of things. He has
created bad men as well as good men. It is He who gives us good
tendencies, and it is He again who gives us evil tendencies.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"In that case we aren\'t responsible for our sinful actions,
are we?\"

MASTER: \"Sin begets its own result. This is God\'s law. Won\'t you burn
our tongue if you chew a chilli? In his youth Mathur6 led a rather fast
life; so he suffered from various diseases before his death.

\"One may not realize this in youth. I have looked into the hearth in
the kitchen of the Kāli temple when logs are being burnt. At first the
wet wood burns rather well. It doesn\'t seem then that it contains much
moisture. But when the wood is sufficiently burnt, all the moisture runs
back to one end. At last water squirts from the fuel and puts out the
fire.

\"So one should be careful about anger, passion, and greed. Take, for
instance, the case of Hanuman. In a fit of anger he burnt Ceylon. At
last he remembered that Sita was living in the aśoka grove. Then he
began to tremble lest the fire should injure her.\"

NEIGHHBOUR: \"Why has God created wicked people?\"

MASTER: \"That is His will, His play. In His maya there exists avidyā as
well as vidyā. Darkness is needed too. It reveals all the more the glory
of light. There is no doubt that anger, lust, and greed are evils. Why,
then, has God created them? In order to create saints. A man becomes a
saint by conquering the senses. Is there anything impossible for a man
who has subdued his passions? He can even realize God, through His
grace. Again, see how His whole play of creation is perpetuated through
lust.

\"Wicked people are needed too. At one time the tenants of an estate
became unruly. The landlord had to send Golak Choudhury, who was a
ruffian. He was such a harsh administrator that the tenants trembled at
the very mention of his name.

\"There is need of everything. Once Sita said to her Husband: \'Rama, it
would be grand if every house in Ayhodhya were a mansion! I find many
houses old and dilapidated.\' \'But, my dear,\' said Rama, \'if all the
houses were beautiful ones, what would the masons do?\' (Laughter.) God
has created all kinds of things. He has created good trees, and
poisonous plants and weeds as well. Among the animals there are good,
bad, and all kinds of creatures - tigers, lions, snakes, and so on.\"

**Washing away the heart\'s impurities with tears**

NEIGHTBOUR: \"Sir, is it ever possible to realize God while leading the
life of a householder?\"

MASTER: \"Certainly. But as I said just now, one must live in holy
company and pray unceasingly. One should weep for God. When the
impurities of the mind are thus washed away, one realizes God. The mind
is like a needle covered with mud, and God is like a magnet. The needle
cannot be united with the magnet unless it is

free from mud. Tears wash away the mud, which is nothing but lust,
anger, greed, and other evil tendencies, and the inclination to worldly
enjoyments as well. As soon as the mud is washed away, the magnet
attracts the needle, that is to say, man realizes God. Only the pure in
heart see God. A fever patient has an excess of the watery element in
his system. What can quinine do for him unless that is removed?

\"Why shouldn\'t one realize God while living in the world? But, as I
said, one must live in holy company, pray to God, weeping for His grace,
and now and then go into solitude. Unless the plants on a foot-path are
protected at first by fences, they are destroyed by cattle.\"

**Need of a guru**

NEIGHBOUR: \"Then householders, too, will have the vision of God, won\'t
they?\"

MASTER: \"Everybody will surely be liberated. But one should follow the
instructions of the guru; if one follows a devious path, one will suffer
in trying to retrace one\'s steps. It takes a long time to achieve
liberation. A man may fail to obtain it in this life. Perhaps he will
realize God only after many births. Sages like Janaka performed worldly
duties. They performed them, bearing God in their minds, as a
dancing-girl dances, keeping jars or trays on her head. Haven\'t you
seen how the women in northwest India walk, talking and laughing while
carrying water-pitchers on their beads?\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"You just referred to the instructions of the guru. How
shall we find him?\"

MASTER: \"Anyone and everyone cannot be a guru. A huge timber floats on
the water and can carry animals as well. But a piece of worthless wood
sinks, if a man sits on it, and drowns him. Therefore in every age God
incarnates Himself as the guru, to teach humanity. Satchidananda alone
is the guru.

\"What is knowledge? And what is the nature of this ego? \'God alone is
the Doer, and none else\' - that is knowledge. I am not the doer; I am a
mere instrument in His hand. Therefore I say: \'O Mother, Thou art the
Operator and I am the machine. Thou art the Indweller and I am the
house. Thou art the Driver and I am the carriage. I move as Thou movest
me. I do as Thou makest me do. I speak as Thou makest me speak. Not I,
not I, but Thou, but Thou.\' \"

From Prankrishna\'s house the Master went to Colonel Viswanath\'s and
from there to the Lily Cottage.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 3**

VISIT TO VIDYASAGAR

> **August 5, 1882**

PUNDIT ISWAR CHANDRA VIDYASAGAR was born in the village of Beersingh,
not far from Kamarpukur, Sri Ramakrishna\'s birthplace. He was known as
a great scholar, educator, writer, and philanthropist. One of the
creators of modern Bengali, he was also well versed in Sanskrit grammar
and poetry. His generosity made his name a household word with his
countrymen, most of his income being given in charity to widows,
orphans, indigent students, and other needy people. Nor was his
compassion limited to human beings: he stopped drinking milk for years
so that the calves should not be deprived of it, and he would not drive
in a carriage for fear of causing discomfort to the horses. He was a man
of indomitable spirit, which he showed when he gave up the lucrative
position of principal of the Sanskrit College of Calcutta because of a
disagreement with the authorities. His affection for his mother was
especially deep. One day, in the absence of a ferryboat, he swam a
raging river at the risk of his life to fulfil her wish that he should
be present at his brother\'s wedding. His whole life was one of utter
simplicity. The title Vidyasagar, meaning \"Ocean of Learning\", was
given him in recognition of his vast erudition.

**Master\'s visit to the scholar**

Sri Ramakrishna had long wanted to visit Iswar Chandra Vidyasagar.
Learning from M. that he was a teacher at Vidyasagar\'s school, the
Master asked: \"Can you take me to Vidyasagar? I should like very much
to see him.\" M. told Iswar Chandra of Sri Ramakrishna\'s wish, and the
pundit gladly agreed that M. should bring the Master, some Saturday
afternoon at four o\'clock. He only asked M. what kind of paramahamsa
the Master was, saying, \"Does he wear an ochre cloth?\" M. answered:
\"No, sir. He is an unusual person. He wears a red-bordered cloth and
polished slippers. He lives in a room in Rani Rasmani\'s temple garden.
In his room there is a couch with a mattress and mosquito net. He has no
outer indication of holiness. But he doesn\'t know anything except God.
Day and night he thinks of God alone.\"

On the afternoon of August 5 the Master left Dakshineswar in a hackney
carriage, accompanied by Bhavanath, M., and Hazra. Vidyasagar lived in
Badurbagan, in central Calcutta, about six miles from Dakshineswar. On
the way Sri Ramakrishna talked with his companions; but as the carriage
neared Vidyasagar\'s house his mood suddenly changed. He was overpowered
with divine ecstasy. Not noticing this, M. pointed out the garden house
where Raja Rammohan Roy had lived. The Master was annoyed and said, \"I
don\'t care about such things now.\" He was going into an ecstatic
state.

The carriage stopped in front of. Vidyasagar\'s house. The Master
alighted, supported by M., who then led the way. In the courtyard were
many flowering plants. As the Master walked to the house he said to M.,
like a child, pointing to his shirt-button: \"My shirt is unbuttoned.
Will that offend Vidyasagar?\" \"Oh, no!\" said M. \"Don\'t be anxious
about it. Nothing about you will be offensive. You don\'t have to button
your shirt.\" He accepted the assurance simply, like a child.

Vidyasagar was about sixty-two years old, sixteen or seventeen years
older than the Master. He lived in a two-storey house built in the
English fashion, with lawns on all sides and surrounded by a high wall.
After climbing the stairs to the second floor, Sri Ramakrishna and his
devotees entered a room at the far end of which Vidyasagar was seated
facing them, with a table in front of him. To the right of the table was
a bench. Some friends of their host occupied chairs on the other two
sides.

Vidyasagar rose to receive the Master. Sri Ramakrishna stood in front of
the bench, with one hand resting on the table. He gazed at Vidyasagar,
as if they had known each other before, and smiled in an ecstatic mood.
In that mood he remained standing a few minutes. Now and then, to bring
his mind back to normal consciousness, he said, \"I shall have a drink
of water.\"

In the mean time the young members of the household and a few friends
and relatives of Vidyasagar had gathered around. Sri Ramakrishna, still
in an ecstatic mood, sat on the bench. A young man, seventeen or
eighteen years old, who had come to Vidyasagar to seek financial help
for his education, was seated there. The Master sat down at a little
distance from the boy, saying in an abstracted mood: \"Mother, this boy
is very much attached to the world. He belongs to Thy realm of
ignorance.\"

Vidyasagar told someone to bring water and asked M. whether the Master
would like some sweetmeats also. Since M. did not object, Vidyasagar
himself went eagerly to the inner apartments and brought the sweets.
They were placed before the Master. Bhavanath and Hazra also received
their share. When they were offered to M., Vidyasagar said: \"Oh, he is
like one of the family. We needn\'t worry about him.\" Referring to a
young devotee, the Master said to Vidyasagar: \"He is a nice young man
and is sound at the core. He is like the river Phalgu. The surface is
covered with sand; but if you dig a little you will find water flowing
underneath.\"

After taking some of the sweets, the Master, with a smile, began to
speak to Vidyasagar. Meanwhile the room had become filled with people;
some were standing and others were seated.

MASTER: \"Ah! Today, at last, I have come to the ocean. Up till now I
have seen only canals, marshes, or a river at the most. But today I am
face to face with the sagar, the ocean.\"(All laugh.)

VIDYASAGAR (smiling): \"Then please take home some salt water.\"
(Laughter.)

MASTER: \"Oh, no! Why salt water? You aren\'t the ocean of ignorance.
You are the ocean of vidyā, knowledge. You are the ocean of condensed
milk.\" (All laugh.)

VIDYASAGAR: \"Well, you may put it that way.\"

The pundit became silent. Sri Ramakrishna said: \"Your activities are
inspired by sattva. Though they are rajasic, they are influenced by
sattva. Compassion springs from sattva. Though work for the good of
others belongs to rajas, yet this rajas has sattva for its basis, and is
not harmful. Suka and other sages cherished compassion in their minds to
give people religious instruction, to teach them about God. You are
distributing food and learning. That is good too. If these activities
are done in a selfless spirit they lead to God. But most people work for
fame or to acquire merit. Their activities are not selfless. Besides,
you are already a siddha.\"

VIDYASAGAR: \"How is that, sir?\"

MASTER (laughing): \"When potatoes and other vegetables are well cooked,
they become soft and tender. And you possess such a tender nature! You
are so compassionate!\" (Laughter.)

VIDYASAGAR (laughing): \"But when the paste of kalai pulse is boiled it
becomes all the harder.\"

**Uninspired scholarship condemned**

MASTER: \"But you don\'t belong to that class. Mere pundits are like
diseased fruit that becomes hard and will not ripen at all. Such fruit
has neither the freshness of green fruit nor the flavour of ripe.
Vultures soar very high in the sky, but their eyes are fixed on rotten
carrion on the ground. The book-learned are reputed to be wise, but they
are attached to \'woman and gold\'. Like the vultures, they are in
search of carrion. They are attached to the world of ignorance.
Compassion, love of God, and renunciation are the glories of true
knowledge.\"

Vidyasagar listened to these words in silence. The others, too, gazed at
the Master and were attentive to every word he said.

Vidyasagar was very reticent about giving religious instruction to
others. He had studied Hindu philosophy. Once, when M. had asked him his
opinion of it, Vidyasagar had said, \"I think the philosophers have
failed to explain what was in their minds.\" But in his daily life he
followed all the rituals of Hindu religion and wore the

sacred thread of a brahmin. About God he had once declared: \"It is
indeed impossible to know Him. What, then, should be our duty? It seems
to me that we should live in such a way that, if others followed our
example, this very earth would be heaven. Everyone should try to do good
to the world.\"

**The world of duality & Transcendental nature of Brahman**

Sri Ramakrishna\'s conversation now turned to the Knowledge of Brahman.

MASTER: \"Brahman is beyond vidyā and avidyā, knowledge and ignorance.
It is beyond maya, the illusion of duality.

\"The world consists of the illusory duality of knowledge and ignorance.
It contains knowledge and devotion, and also attachment to \'Woman and
gold\'; righteousness and unrighteousness; good and evil. But Brahman is
unattached to these. Good and evil apply to the jiva, the individual
soul, as do righteousness and unrighteousness; but Brahman is not at all
affected by them.

\"One man may read the Bhagavata by the light of a lamp, and another may
commit a forgery by that very light; but the lamp is unaffected. The sun
sheds its light on the wicked as well as on the virtuous.

\"You may ask, \'How, then, can one explain misery and sin and
unhappiness?\' The answer is that these apply only to the jiva. Brahman
is unaffected by them. There is poison in a snake; but though others may
die if bitten by it, the snake itself is not affected by the poison.

**Brahman cannot be expressed in words**

\"What Brahman is cannot he described. All things in the world - the
Vedas, the Puranas, the Tantras, the six systems of philosophy - have
been defiled, like food that has been touched by the tongue, for they
have been read or uttered by the tongue. Only one thing has not been
defiled in this way, and that is Brahman. No one has ever been able to
say what Brahman is.\"

VIDYASAGAR (to his friends): \"Oh! That is a remarkable statement. I
have learnt something new today.\"

MASTER: \"A man had two sons. The father sent them to a preceptor to
learn the Knowledge of Brahman. After a few years they returned from
their preceptor\'s house and bowed low before their father. Wanting to
measure the depth of their knowledge of Brahman, he first questioned the
older of the two boys. \'My child,\' he said, \'You have studied all the
scriptures. Now tell me, what is the nature of Brahman?\' The boy began
to explain Brahman by reciting various texts from the Vedas. The father
did not say anything. Then he asked the younger son the same question.
But the boy remained silent and stood with eyes cast down. No word
escaped his lips. The father was pleased and said to him: \'My child,
you have understood a little of Brahman. What It is cannot be expressed
in words.\'

**Parable of ant and sugar hill**

\"Men often think they have understood Brahman fully. Once an ant went
to a hill of sugar. One grain filled its stomach. Taking another grain
in its mouth it started homeward. On its way it thought, \'Next time I
shall carry home the whole hill.\' That is the way shallow minds think.
They don\'t know that Brahman is beyond one\'s words and thought.
However great a man may be, how much can he know of Brahman? Sukadeva
and sages like him may have been big ants; but even they could carry at
the utmost eight or ten grains of sugar!

\"As for what has been said in the Vedas and the Puranas, do you know
what it is like? Suppose a man has seen the ocean, and somebody asks
him, \'Well, what is the ocean like?\' The first man opens his mouth as
wide as he can and says: \'What a sight! What tremendous waves and
sounds!\' The description of Brahman in the sacred books is like that.
It is said in the Vedas that Brahman is of the nature of Bliss - It is
Satchidananda.

\"Suka and other sages stood on the shore of this Ocean of Brahman and
saw and touched the water. According to one school of thought they never
plunged into it. Those who do, cannot come back to the world again.

**Parable of salt doll**

\"In samādhi one attains the Knowledge of Brahman - one realizes
Brahman. In that state reasoning stops altogether, and man becomes mute.
He has no power to describe the nature of Brahman.

\"Once a salt doll went to measure the depth of the ocean. (All laugh.)
It wanted to tell others how deep the water was. But this it could never
do, for no sooner did it get into the water than it melted. Now who was
there to report the ocean\'s depth?\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Suppose a man has obtained the Knowledge of Brahman in
samādhi. Doesn\'t he speak any more?\"

MASTER: \"Sankaracharya retained the \'ego of Knowledge\' in order to
teach others. After the vision of Brahman a man becomes silent. He
reasons about It as long as he has not realized It. If you heat butter
in a pan on the stove, it makes a sizzling sound as long as the water it
contains has not dried up. But when no trace of water is left the
clarified butter makes no sound. If you put an uncooked cake of flour in
that butter it sizzles again. But after the cake is cooked all sound
stops. Just so, a man established in samādhi comes down to the relative
plane of consciousness in order to teach others, and then he talks about
God.

\"The bee buzzes as long as it is not sitting on a flower. It becomes
silent when it begins to sip the honey. But sometimes, intoxicated with
the honey, it buzzes again.

\"An empty pitcher makes a gurgling sound when it is dipped in water.
When it fills up it becomes silent. (All laugh.) But if the water is
poured from it into another pitcher, then you will hear the sound again.
(Laughter.)

**Rishis of ancient India**

\"The rishis of old attained the Knowledge of Brahman. One cannot have
this so long as there is the slightest trace of worldliness. How hard
the rishis laboured! Early in the morning they would go away from the
hermitage, and would spend the whole day in solitude, meditating on
Brahman. At night they would return to the hermitage and eat a little
fruit or roots. They kept their minds aloof from the objects of sight,
hearing, touch, and other things of a worldly nature. Only thus did they
realize Brahman as their own inner consciousness.

\"But in the Kaliyuga, man, being totally dependent on food for life,
cannot altogether shake off the idea that he is the body. In this state
of mind it is not proper for him to say, \'I am He.\' When a man does
all sorts of worldly things, he should not say, \'I am Brahman.\' Those
who cannot give up attachment to worldly things, and who find no means
to shake off the feeling of \'I\', should rather cherish the idea \'I am
God\'s servant; I am His devotee.\' One can also realize God by
following the path of devotion.

**Jnani and Vijnāni**

\"The jnani gives up his identification with worldly things,
discriminating, \'Not this, not this\'. Only then can he realize
Brahman. It is like reaching the roof of a house by leaving the steps
behind, one by one. But the vijnāni, who is more intimately acquainted
with Brahman, realizes something more. He realizes that the steps are
made of the same materials as the roof: bricks, lime, and brick-dust.
That which is realized intuitively as Brahman, through the eliminating
process of \'Not this, not this\', is then found to have become the
universe and all its living beings. The vijnāni sees that the Reality
which is nirguna, without attributes, is also saguna, with attributes.

\"A man cannot live on the roof a long time. He comes down again. Those
who realize Brahman in samādhi come down also and find that it is
Brahman that has become the universe and its living beings. In the
musical scale there are the notes sa, re ga, ma, pa, dha, and ni; but
one cannot keep one\'s voice on \'ni\' a long time. The ego does not
vanish altogether. The man coming down from samādhi perceives that it is
Brahman that has become the ego, the universe, and all living beings.
This is known as vijnāna.

**Path of love is easy**

\"The path of knowledge leads to Truth, as does the path that combines
knowledge and love. The path of love, too, leads to this goal. The way
of love is as true as the way of knowledge. All paths ultimately lead to
the same Truth. But as long as God keeps the feeling of ego in us, it is
easier to follow the path of love.

\"The vijnāni sees that Brahman is immovable and actionless, like Mount
Sumeru. This universe consists of the three gunas - sattva, rajas, and
tamas. They are in Brahman. But Brahman is unattached.

**God\'s supernatural powers**

\"The vijnāni further sees that what is Brahman is the Bhagavan, the
Personal God. He who is beyond the three gunas is the Bhagavan, with His
six supernatural powers. Living beings, the universe, mind,
intelligence, love, renunciation, knowledge - all these are the
manifestations of His power. (With a laugh) If an aristocrat has neither
house nor property, or if he has been forced to sell them, one doesn\'t
call him an aristocrat any more. (All laugh.) God is endowed with the
six supernatural powers. If He were not who would obey Him? (All laugh.)

**Different manifestations of God\'s power**

\"Just see how picturesque this universe is! How many things there are!
The sun, moon, and stars; and how many varieties of living beings! - big
and small, good and bad, strong and weak - some endowed with more power
some with less.\"

VIDYASAGAR: \"Has He endowed some with more power and others with
less?\"

MASTER: \"As the All-pervading Spirit He exists in all beings, even in
the ant. But the manifestations of His Power are different in different
beings; otherwise, how can one person put ten to flight, while another
can\'t face even one? And why do all people respect you? Have you grown
a pair horns? (Laughter.) You have more compassion and learning.
Therefore people honour you and come to pay you their respects. Don\'t
you agree with me?\"

Vidyasagar smiled.

The Master continued: \"There is nothing in mere scholarship. The object
of study is to find means of knowing God and realizing Him. A holy man
had a book. When asked what it contained, he opened it and showed that
on all the pages were written the words \'Om Rama\', and nothing else.

\"What is the significance of the Gita? It is what you find by repeating
the word ten times. It is then reversed into \'tagi\', which means a
person who has renounced everything for God. And the lesson of. the Gita
is: \'O man, renounce everything and seek God alone.\' Whether a man is
a monk or a householder, he has to shake off all attachment from his
mind.

\"Chaitanyadeva set out on a pilgrimage to southern India. One day he
saw a man reading the Gita. Another man, seated at a distance, was
listening and weeping. His eyes were swimming in tears. Chaitanyadeva
asked him, \'Do you understand all this?\' The man said, \'No, revered
sir, I don\'t understand a word of the text.\' \'Then why are you
crying?\' asked Chaitanya. The devotee said: \'I see Arjuna\'s chariot
before me. I see Lord Krishna and Arjuna seated in front of it, talking.
I see this and I weep.\'

\"Why does a vijnāni keep an attitude of love toward God? The answer is
that \'I-consciousness\' persists. It disappears in the state of
samādhi, no doubt, but it comes back. In the case of ordinary people the
\'I\' never disappears. You may cut down the Aśwattha tree, but the next
day sprouts shoot up. (All laugh.)

**Ego causes our sufferings**

\"Even after the attainment of Knowledge this \'I-consciousness\' comes
up, nobody knows from where. You dream of a tiger. Then you awake; but
your heart keeps on palpitating! All our suffering is due to this \'I\'.
The cow cries, \'Hamba!\', which means \'I\'. That is why it suffers so
much. It is yoked to the plough and made to work in rain and sun. Then
it may be killed by the butcher. From its hide shoes are made, and also
drums,

which are mercilessly, beaten. (Laughter.) Still it does not escape
suffering. At last strings are made out of its entrails for the bows
used in carding cotton. Then it no longer says, \'Hamba! Hamba!\', \'I!
I!\' but \'Tuhu! Tuhu!\', \'Thou! Thou!\'. Only then are its troubles
over. O Lord, I am the servant; Thou art the Master. I am the child;
Thou art the Mother.

\"Once Rama asked Hanuman, \'How do you look on Me?\' And Hanuman
replied: \'O Rama, as long as I have the feeling of \"I\", I see that
Thou art the whole and I am a part; Thou art the Master and I am Thy
servant. But when, O Rama, I have the knowledge of Truth, then I realize
that Thou art I and I am Thou.\'

\"The relationship of master and servant is the proper one. Since this
\'I\' must remain, let the rascal be God\'s servant.

**Evil of \"I\" and \"mine\"**

23. \'I\' and \'mine\' - these constitute ignorance. \'My house\', \'my
    wealth\', \'my learning\', \'my possessions\' - the attitude that
    prompts one to say such things comes of ignorance. On the contrary,
    the attitude born of Knowledge is: \'O God, Thou art the Master, and
    all these things belong to Thee. House, family, children,
    attendants, friends, are Thine.\'

\"One should constantly remember death. Nothing will survive death. We
are born into this world to perform certain duties, like the people who
come from the countryside to Calcutta on business. If a visitor goes to
a rich man\'s garden, the superintendent says to him, \'This is our
garden\', \'This is our lake\', and so forth. But if the Superintendent
is dismissed for some misdeed, he can\'t carry away even his mango-wood
chest. He sends it secretly by the gate-keeper. (Laughter.)

\"God laughs on two occasions. He laughs when the physician says to the
patient\'s mother, \'Don\'t be afraid, mother; I shall certainly cure
your boy.\' God laughs, saying to Himself, \'I am going to take his
life, and this man says he will save it!\' The physician thinks he is
the master, forgetting that God is the Master. God laughs again when two
brothers divide their land with a string, saying to each other, \'This
side is mine and that side is your\'. He laughs and says to Himself,
\'The whole universe belongs to Me, but they say they own this portion
or that portion.\'

\"Can one know God through reasoning? Be His servant, surrender yourself
to Him, and then pray to Him.

(To Vidyasagar, with a smile) \"Well, what is your attitude?\"

VIDYASAGAR (smiling): \"Some day I shall confide it to you.\"(All laugh)

MASTER (laughing): \"God cannot be realized through mere scholarly
reasoning.\"

Intoxicated with divine love, the Master sang:

> *Who is there that can understand what Mother Kāli is?*
>
> *Even the six darsanas are powerless to reveal Her.*
>
> *It is She, the scriptures say, that is the Inner Self*
>
> *Of the yogi, who in Self discovers all his joy;*
>
> *She that, of Her own sweet will, inhabits every living thing.*
>
> *The macrocosm and microcosm rest in the Mother\'s womb; Now do you
> see how vast it is? In the Muladhara The yogi meditates on Her, and in
> the Sahasrara: Who but Śiva has beheld Her as She really is?*
>
> *Within the lotus wilderness She sports beside Her Mate, the Swan.*
>
> *When man aspires to understand Her, Ramprasad must smile;*
>
> *To think of knowing Her, he says, is quite as laughable*
>
> *As to imagine one can swim across the boundless sea.*
>
> *But while my mind has understood, alas! my heart has not;*
>
> *Though but a dwarf, it still would strive to make a captive of the
> moon.*
>
> Continuing, the Master said: \"Did you notice?
>
> *The macrocosm and microcosm rest in the Mother\'s womb; Now do you
> see how vast it is?*

Again, the poet says:

> 對 *Even the six darsanas are powerless to reveal Her.*

She cannot be realized by means of mere scholarship.

**Power of faith**

\"One must have faith and love. Let me tell you how powerful faith is. A
man was about to cross the sea from Ceylon to India. Bibhishana said to
him: \'Tie this thing in a corner of your wearing-cloth, and you will
cross the sea safely. You will be able to walk on the water. But be sure
not to examine it, or you will sink.\' The man was walking easily on the
water of the sea - such is the strength of faith - when, having gone
part of the way, he thought, \'What is this wonderful thing Bibhishana
has given me, that I can walk even on the water?\' He untied the knot
and found only a leaf with the name of Rama written on it. \'Oh, just
this!\' he thought, and instantly he sank.

\"There is a popular saying that Hanuman jumped over the sea through his
faith in Rama\'s name, but Rama himself had to build a bridge.

\"If a man has faith in God, then He need not be afraid though he may
have committed sin - nay, the vilest sin.\"

Then Sri Ramakrishna sang a song glorifying the Power of faith:

> *If only I can pass away repeating Durga\'s name,*
>
> *How canst Thou then, O Blessed One,*
>
> *Withhold from me deliverance,*
>
> *Wretched though I may be?*

The Master continued: \"Faith and devotion. One realizes God easily
through devotion. He is grasped through ecstasy of love.\"

With these words the Master sang again:

> *How are you trying, O my mind, to know the nature of God?*
>
> *You are groping like a madman locked in a dark room.*
>
> *He is grasped through ecstatic love; how can you fathom Him without
> it?*
>
> *Only through affirmation, never negation, can you know Him;*
>
> *Neither through Veda nor through Tantra nor the six darsanas.*
>
> *It is in love\'s elixir only that He delights, O mind;*
>
> *He dwells in the body\'s inmost depths, in Everlasting Joy.*
>
> *And, for that love, the mighty yogis practise yoga from age to age;*
>
> *When love awakes, the Lord, like a magnet, draws to Him the soul.*

*He it is, says Ramprasad, that I approach as Mother;*

> *But must I give away the secret, here in the marketplace? From the
> hints I have given, O mind, guess what that Being is!*

While singing, the Master went into samādhi. He was seated on the bench,
facing west, the palms of his hands joined together, his body erect and
motionless. Everyone watched him expectantly. Vidyasagar, too, was
speechless and could not take his eyes from the Master.

**Brahman and Śakti are identical**

After a time Sri Ramakrishna showed signs of regaining the normal state.
He drew a deep breath and said with a smile: \"The means of realizing
God are ecstasy of love and devotion - that is, one must love God. He
who is Brahman is addressed as the Mother.

> *He it is, says Ramprasad, that I approach as Mother;*
>
> *But must I give away the secret, here in the market-place?*
>
> *From the hints I have given, O mind, guess what that Being is!*

\"Ramprasad asks the mind only to guess the nature of God. He wishes it
to understand that what is called Brahman in the Vedas is addressed by
Him as the Mother. He who is attributeless also has attributes. He who
is Brahman is also Śakti. When thought of as inactive, He is called
Brahman, and when thought of as the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer,
He is called the Primordial Energy, Kāli.

\"Brahman and Śakti are identical, like fire and its power to bum. When
we talk of fire we automatically mean also its power to burn. Again, the
fire\'s power to burn implies the fire itself. If you accept the one you
must accept the other.

\"Brahman alone is addressed as the Mother. This is because a mother is
an object of great love. One is able to realize God just through love.
Ecstasy of feeling, devotion, love, and faith - these are the means.
Listen to a song:

> *As is a man\'s meditation, so is his feeling of love;*
>
> *As is a man\'s feeling of love, so is his gain;*
>
> *And faith is the root of all.*
>
> *If in the Nectar Lake of Mother Ka1i\'s feet*
>
> *My mind remains immersed,*
>
> *Of little use are worship, oblations, or sacrifice.*

**Growth of divine love lessens worldly duties**

\"What is needed is absorption in God - loving Him intensely. The
\'Nectar Lake\' is the Lake of Immortality. A man sinking in It does not
die, but becomes immortal. Some people believe that by thinking of God
too much the mind becomes deranged; but that is not true. God is the
Lake of Nectar, the Ocean of Immortality. He is called the \'Immortal\'
in the Vedas. Sinking in It, one does not die, but verily transcends
death. Of little use are worship, oblations, or sacrifice.

If a man comes to love God, he need not trouble himself much about these
activities. One needs a fan only as long as there is no breeze. The fan
may be laid aside if the southern breeze blows. Then what need is there
of a fan?

(To Vidyasagar) \"The activities that you are engaged in are good. It is
very good if you can perform them in a selfless spirit, renouncing
egotism, giving up the idea that you are the doer. Through such action
one develops love and devotion to God, and ultimately realizes Him.

\"The more you come to love God, the less you will be inclined to
perform action. When the daughter-in-law is with child, her
mother-in-law gives her less work to do. As time goes by she is given
less and less work.

When the time of delivery nears, she is not allowed to do any work at
all, lest it should hurt the child or cause difficulty at the time of
birth.

\"By these philanthropic activities you are really doing good to
yourself. If you can do them disinterestedly, your mind will become pure
and you will develop love of God. As soon as you have that love you will
realize Him.

\"Man cannot really help the world. God alone does that - He who has
created the sun and the moon, who has put love for their children in
parents\' hearts, endowed noble souls with compassion, and holy men and
devotees with divine love. The man who works for others, without any
selfish motive, really does good to himself.

\"There is gold buried in your heart, but you are not yet aware of it.
It is covered with a thin layer of clay. Once you are aware of it, all
these activities of yours will lessen. After the birth of her child, the
daughter-in-law in the family busies herself with it alone. Everything
she does is only for the child. Her mother-in-law doesn\'t let her do
any household duties.

**Parable of the wood-cutter**

\"Go forward. A wood-cutter once entered a forest to gather wood. A
brahmachari said to him, \'Go forward.\' He obeyed the injunction and
discovered some sandal-wood trees. After a few days he reflected, \'The
holy man asked me to go forward. He didn\'t tell me to stop here.\' So
he went forward and found a silver-mine. After a few days he went still
farther and discovered a gold-mine, and next, mines of diamonds and
precious stones. With these he became immensely rich.

\"Through selfless work, love of God grows in the heart. Then, through
His grace one realizes Him in course of time. God can be seen. One can
talk to him as I am talking to you.\"

In silent wonder they all sat listening to the Master\'s words. It
seemed to them that the Goddess of Wisdom Herself, seated on Sri
Ramakrishna\'s tongue was addressing these words not merely to
Vidyasagar, but to all humanity for its good.

It was nearly nine o\'clock in the evening. The Master was about to
leave.

Master (to Vidyasagar, with a smile): \"The words I have spoken are
really superfluous. You know all this; you simply aren\'t conscious of
it. There are countless gems in the coffers of Varuna. But he himself
isn\'t aware of them.\"

VIDYASAGAR (with a smile): \"You may say as you like.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Oh yes. There are many wealthy people who don\'t
know the names of all their servants, and are even unaware of many of
the precious things in their houses.\"(All laugh.)

Everybody was delighted with the Master\'s conversation. Again
addressing Vidyasagar, he said with a smile:

\"Please visit the temple garden some time - I mean the garden of
Rasmani. It\'s a charming place.\"

VIDYASAGAR: \"Oh, of course I shall go. You have so kindly come here to
see me, and shall I not return your visit?\"

MASTER: \"Visit me? Oh, never think of such a thing!\"

VIDYASAGAR: \"Why, sir? Why do you say that? May I ask you to explain?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"You see, we are like small fishing-boats. (All
smile.) We can ply in small canals and shallow waters and also in big
rivers. But you are a ship. You may run aground on the way!\" (All
laugh.)

Vidyasagar remained silent. Sri Ramakrishna said with a laugh, \"But
even a ship can go there at this season.\"

VIDYASAGR (smiling): \"Yes, this is the monsoon season.\" (All laugh.)

M. said to himself: \"This is indeed the monsoon season of newly
awakened love. At such times one doesn\'t care for prestige or
formalities.\"

Sri Ramakrishna then took leave of Vidyasagar, who with his friends
escorted the Master to the main gate, leading the way with a lighted
candle in his hand. Before leaving the room, the Master prayed for the
family\'s welfare, going into an ecstatic mood as he did so.

As soon as the Master and the devotees reached the gate, they saw an
unexpected sight and stood still. In front of them was a bearded
gentleman of fair complexion, aged about thirty-six. He wore his clothes
like a Bengali, but on his head was a white turban tied after the
fashion of the Sikhs. No sooner did he see the Master than he fell
prostrate before him, turban and all.

When he stood up the Master said: \"Who is this? Balaram? Why so late in
the evening?\"

BALARAM: \"I have been waiting here a long time, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Why didn\'t you come in?\"

BALARAM: \"All were listening to you. I didn\'t like to disturb you.\"
The Master got into the carriage with his companions.

VIDYASAGAR (to M., softly): \"Shall I pay the carriage hire?\"

M: \"Oh, don\'t bother, please. It is taken care of.\"

Vidyasagar and his friends bowed to Sri Ramakrishna, and the carriage
started for Dakshineswar. But the little group, with the venerable
Vidyasagar at their head holding the lighted candle, stood at the gate
and gazed after the Master until he was out of sight.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 4**

ADVICE TO HOUSEHOLDERS

> **August 13, 1882**

THE MASTER WAS CONVERSING with Kedār and some other devotees in his room
in the temple garden. Kedār was a government official and had spent
several years at Dāccā, in East Bengal, where he had become a friend of
Vijay Goswami. The two would spend a great part of their time together,
talking about Sri Ramakrishna and his spiritual experiences. Kedār had
once been a member of the Brahmo Samaj. He followed the path of bhakti.
Spiritual talk always brought tears to his eyes.

It was five o\'clock in the afternoon. Kedār was very happy that day,
having arranged a religious festival for Sri Ramakrishna. A singer had
been hired by Ram, and the whole day passed in joy.

**Secret of divine communion**

The Master explained to the devotees the secret of communion with God.

MASTER: \"With the realization of Satchidananda one goes into samādhi.
Then duties drop away. Suppose I have been talking about the ostad and
he arrives. What need is there of talking about him then? How long does
the bee buzz around? So long as it isn\'t sitting on a flower. But it
will not do for the sadhaka to renounce duties. He should perform his
duties, such as worship, japa, meditation, prayer, and pilgrimage.

\"If you see someone engaged in reasoning even after he has realized
God, you may liken him to a bee, which also buzzes a little even while
sipping honey from a flower.\"

The Master was highly pleased with the ostad\'s music. He said to the
musician, \"There is a special manifestation of God\'s power in a man
who has any outstanding gift, such as proficiency in music.\"

MUSICIAN: \"Sir, what is the way to realize God?\"

MASTER: \"Bhakti is the one essential thing. To be sure, God exists in
all beings. Who, then, is a devotee? He whose mind dwells on God. But
this is not possible as long as one has egotism and vanity. The water of
God\'s grace cannot collect on the high mound of egotism. It runs down.
I am a mere machine.

**Master\'s respect for other faiths**

(To Kedār and the other devotees) \"God can be realized through all
paths. All religions are true. The important thing is to reach the roof.
You can reach it by stone stairs or by wooden stairs or by bamboo steps
or by a rope. You can also climb up by a bamboo pole.

**Many names of one God**

\"You may say that there are many errors and superstitions in another
religion. I should reply: Suppose there are. Every religion has errors.
Everyone thinks that his watch alone gives the correct time. It is
enough to have yearning for God. It is enough to love Him and feel
attracted to Him: Don\'t you know that God is the Inner Guide? He sees
the longing of our heart and the yearning of our soul. Suppose a man has
several sons. The older boys address him distinctly as \'Baba\' or
\'Papa\', but the babies can at best call him \'Ba\' or \'Pa\'. Now,
will the father be angry with those who address him in this indistinct
way? The father knows that they too are calling him, only they cannot
pronounce his name well. All children are the same to the father.
Likewise, the devotees call on God alone, though by different names.
They call on one Person only. God is one, but His names are many.\"

**Thursday, August 24, 1882.**

Sri Ramakrishna was talking to Hazra on the long northeast verandah of
his room, when M. arrived. He saluted the Master reverently.

**Spiritual disciplines necessary at the beginning**

MASTER: \"I should like to visit Iswar Chandra Vidyasagar a few times
more. The painter first draws the general outlines and then puts in the
details and colours at his leisure. The moulder first makes the image
out of clay, then plasters it, then gives it a coat of whitewash, and
last of all paints it with a brush. All these steps must be taken
successively. Vidyasagar is fully ready, but his inner stuff is covered
with a thin layer. He is now engaged in doing good works; but he
doesn\'t know what is within himself. Gold is hidden within him. God
dwells within us. If one knows that, one feels like giving up all
activities and praying to God with a yearning soul.\"

So the Master talked with M. - now standing, now pacing up and down the
long verandah.

MASTER: \"A little spiritual discipline is necessary in order to know
what lies within.\"

M: \"Is it necessary to practise discipline all through life?\"

MASTER: \"No. But one must be up and doing in the beginning. After that
one need not work hard. The helmsman stands up and clutches the rudder
firmly as long as the boat is passing through waves, storms, high wind,
or around the curves of a river; but he relaxes after steering through
them. As soon as the boat passes the curves and the helmsman feels a
favourable wind, he sits comfortably and just touches the rudder. Next
he prepares to unfurl the sail and gets ready for a smoke. Likewise, the
aspirant enjoys peace and calm after passing the waves and storms of
\'woman and gold\'.

**\"Woman and gold\" is the obstruction to yoga**

\"Some are born with the characteristics of the yogi; but they too
should be careful. It is \'woman and gold\' alone that is the obstacle;
it makes them deviate from the path of yoga and drags them into
worldliness. Perhaps they have some desire for enjoyment. After
fulfilling their desire, they again direct their minds to God and thus
recover their former state of mind, fit for the practise of yoga.

\"Have you ever seen the spring trap for fish, called the
\'satka-kal\'?\"

M: \"No, sir, I haven\'t seen it.\"

MASTER: \"They use it in our part of the country. One end of a bamboo
pole is fastened in the ground, and the other is bent over with a catch.
From this end a line with a hook hangs over the water, with bait tied to
the hook. When the fish swallows the bait, suddenly the bamboo jumps up
and regains its upright position.

\"Again, take a pair of scales for example. If a weight is placed on one
side, the lower needle moves away from the upper one. The lower needle
is the mind, and the upper one, God. The meeting of the two is yoga.

\"Unless the mind becomes steady there cannot be yoga. It is the wind of
worldliness that always disturbs the mind, which may be likened to a
candle flame. If that flame doesn\'t move at all, then one is said to
have attained yoga.

23. \'Woman and gold\' alone is the obstacle to yoga. Always analyse
    what you see. What is there in the body of a woman? Only such things
    as blood, flesh, fat, entrails, and the like. Why should one love
    such a body?

\"Sometimes I used to assume a rajasic mood in order to practise
renunciation. Once I had the desire to put on a gold-embroidered robe,
wear a ring on my finger, and smoke a hubble-bubble with a long pipe.
Mathur Babu procured all these things for me. I wore the
gold-embroidered robe and said to myself after a while, \'Mind! This is
what is called a gold-embroidered robe.\' Then I took it off and threw
it away. I couldn\'t stand the robe any more. Again I said to myself,
\'Mind! This is called a shawl, and this a ring, and this, smoking a
hubble-bubble with a long pipe.\' I threw those things away once for
all, and the desire to enjoy them never arose in my mind again.\"

It was almost dusk. The Master and M. stood talking alone near the door
on the southeast verandah.

MASTER (to M.): \"The mind of the yogi is always fixed on God, always
absorbed in the Self. You can recognize such a man by merely looking at
him. His eyes are wide open, with an aimless look, like the eyes of the
mother bird hatching her eggs. Her entire mind is fixed on the eggs, and
there is a vacant look in her eyes. Can you show me such a picture?\"

M: \"I shall try to get one.\"

As evening came on, the temples were lighted up. Sri Ramakrishna was
seated on his small couch, meditating on the Divine Mother. Then he
chanted the names of God. Incense was burnt in the room, where an oil
lamp had been lighted. Sounds of conch-shells and gongs came floating on
the air as the evening worship began in the temple of Kāli. The light of
the moon flooded all the quarters. The Master again spoke to M.

**God and worldly duties**

MASTER: \"Perform your duties in an unselfish spirit. The work that
Vidyasagar is engaged in is very good. Always try to perform your duties
without desiring any result.\"

23. \"Yes, sir. But may I know if one can realize God while performing
    one\'s duties? Can \'Rama\' and \'desire\' coexist? The other day I
    read in a Hindi couplet: \'Where Rama is, there desire cannot be;
    where desire is, there Rama cannot be.\' \"

MASTER: \"All, without exception, perform work. Even to chant the name
and glories of God is work, as is the meditation of the non-dualist on
\'I am He\'. Breathing is also an activity. There is no way of
renouncing work altogether. So do your work, but surrender the result to
God.\"

**God and worldly duties**

M: \"Sir, may I make an effort to earn more money?\"

MASTER: \"It is permissible to do so to maintain a religious family. You
may try to increase your income, but in an honest way. The goal of life
is not the earning of money, but the service of God. Money is not
harmful if it is devoted to the service of God.\"

M: \"How long should a man feel obliged to do his duty toward his wife
and children?\"

MASTER: \"As long as they feel pinched for food and clothing. But one
need not take the responsibility of a son when he is able to support
himself. When the young fledgling learns to pick its own food, its
mother pecks it if it comes to her for food.\"

M: \"How long must one do one\'s duty?\"

MASTER: \"The blossom drops off when the fruit appears. One doesn\'t
have to do one\'s duty after the attainment of God, nor does one feel
like doing it then.

\"If a drunkard takes too much liquor he cannot retain consciousness. If
he takes only two or three glasses, he can go on with his work. As you
advance nearer and nearer to God, He will reduce your activities little
by little. Have no fear.

\"Finish the few duties you have at hand, and then you will have peace.
When the mistress of the house goes to bathe after finishing her cooking
and other household duties, she won\'t come back, however you may shout
after her.\"

**Different groups of devotees**

5888. \"Sir, what is the meaning of the realization of God? What do you
      mean by God-vision? How does one attain

it?\"

MASTER: \"According to the Vaishnavas the aspirants and the seers of God
may be divided into different groups. These are the pravartaka, the
sadhaka, the siddha, and the siddha of the siddha. He who has just

set foot on the path may be called a pravartaka. He may be called a
sadhaka who has for some time been practising spiritual disciplines,
such as worship, japa, meditation, and the chanting of God\'s name and
glories. He may be called a siddha who has known from his inner
experience that God exists. An analogy is given in the Vedanta to
explain this. The master of the house is asleep in a dark room. Someone
is groping in the darkness to find him. He touches the couch and says,
\'No, it is not he.\' He touches the window and says, \'No, it is not
he.\' He touches the door and says, \'No, it is not he.\' This is known
in the Vedanta as the process of \'Neti, neti\', \'Not this, not this\'.
At last his hand touches the master\'s body and he exclaims, \'Here he
is!\' In other words, he is now conscious of the \'existence\' of the
master. He has found him, but he doesn\'t yet know him intimately.

\"There is another type, known as the siddha of the siddha, the
\'supremely perfect\'. It is quite a different thing when one talks to
the master intimately, when one knows God very intimately through love
and devotion. A siddha has undoubtedly attained God, but the \'supremely
perfect\' has known God very intimately.

**Different moods of aspirants**

\"But in order to realize God, one must assume one of these attitudes:
Śānta, Dāsya, sakhya, Vātsalya, or Madhur.

\"Śānta, the serene attitude. The rishis of olden times had this
attitude toward God. They did not desire any worldly enjoyment. It is
like the single-minded devotion of a wife to her husband. She knows that
her husband is the embodiment of beauty and love, a veritable Madan.

\"Dāsya, the attitude of a servant toward his master. Hanuman had this
attitude toward Rama. He felt the strength of a lion when he worked for
Rama. A wife feels this mood also. She serves her husband with all her
heart and soul. A mother also has a little of this attitude, as Yaśoda
had toward Krishna.

\"Sakhya, the attitude of friendship. Friends say to one another, \'Come
here and sit near me.\' Sridāmā and other friends sometimes fed Krishna
with fruit, part of which they had already eaten, and sometimes climbed
on His shoulders.

\"Vātsalya, the attitude of a mother toward her child. This was
Yaśoda\'s attitude toward Krishna. The wife, too, has a little of this.
She feeds her husband with her very life-blood, as it were. The mother
feels happy only when the child has eaten to his heart\'s content.
Yaśoda would roam about with butter in her hand, in order to feed
Krishna.

\"Madhur, the attitude of a woman toward her paramour. Radha had this
attitude toward Krishna. The wife also feels it for her husband. This
attitude includes all the other four.\"

M: \"When one sees God does one see Him with these eyes?\"

MASTER: \"God cannot be seen with these physical eyes. In the course of
spiritual discipline one gets a \'love body\', endowed with \'love
eyes\', \'love ears\', and so on. One sees God with those \'love eyes\'.
One hears the voice of God with those \'love ears\'. One even gets a
sexual organ made of love.\"

At these words M. burst out laughing. The Master continued, unannoyed,
\"With this \'love body\' the soul communes with God.\"

M. again became serious.

**Seeing God everywhere**

MASTER: \"But this is not possible without intense love of God. One sees
nothing but God everywhere when one loves Him with great intensity. It
is like a person with jaundice, who sees everything yellow. Then one
feels, \'I am verily He\'.

\"A drunkard, deeply intoxicated, says, \'Verily I am Kāli!\' The gopis,
intoxicated with love, exclaimed, \'Verily I am Krishna!\'

\"One who thinks of God, day and night, beholds Him everywhere. It is
like a man\'s seeing flames on all sides after he has gazed fixedly at
one flame for some time.\"

\"But that isn\'t the real flame\", flashed through M.\'s mind.

Sri Ramakrishna, who could read a man\'s inmost thought, said: \"One
doesn\'t lose consciousness by thinking of Him who is all Spirit, all
Consciousness. Shivanath once remarked that too much thinking about God
confounds the brain. Thereupon I said to him, \'How can one become
unconscious by thinking of Consciousness?\' \"

23. \"Yes, sir, I realize that. It isn\'t like thinking of an unreal
    object. How can a man lose his intelligence if he always fixes his
    mind on Him whose very nature is eternal Intelligence?\"

MASTER (with pleasure): \"It is through God\'s grace that you understand
that. The doubts of the mind will not disappear without His grace.
Doubts do not disappear without Self-realization.

\"But one need not fear anything if one has received the grace of God.
It is rather easy for a child to stumble if he holds his father\'s hand;
but there can be no such fear if the father holds the child\'s hand. A
man does not have to suffer any more if God, in His grace, removes his
doubts and reveals Himself to him. But this grace descends upon him only
after he has prayed to God with intense yearning of heart and practised
spiritual discipline. The mother feels compassion for her child when she
sees him running about breathlessly. She has been hiding herself; now
she appears before the child.\"

\"But why should God make us run about?\" thought M

Immediately Sri Ramakrishna said: \"It is His will that we should run
about a little. Then it is great fun. God has created the world in play,
as it were. This is called Mahamaya, the Great Illusion. Therefore one
must take refuge in the Divine Mother, the Cosmic Power Itself. It is
She who has bound us with the shackles of illusion. The realization of
God is possible only when those shackles are severed.\"

**Worship of the Divine Mother**

The Master continued: \"One must propitiate the Divine Mother, the
Primal Energy, in order to obtain God\'s grace. God Himself is Mahamaya,
who deludes the world with Her illusion and conjures up the magic of
creation, preservation, and destruction. She has spread this veil of
ignorance before our eyes. We can go into the inner chamber only when
She lets us pass through the door. Living outside, we see only outer
objects, but not that Eternal Being, Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute.
Therefore it is stated in the purna that deities like Brahma praised
Mahamaya for the destruction of the demons Madhu and Kaitabha.

\"Śakti alone is the root of the universe. That Primal Energy has two
aspects: vidyā and avidyā. Avidyā deludes. Avidyā conjures up \'woman
and gold\', which casts the spell. Vidyā begets devotion, kindness,
wisdom, and love, which lead one to God. This avidyā must be
propitiated, and that is the purpose of the rites of Śakti worship.

\"The devotee assumes various attitudes toward Śakti in order to
propitiate Her: the attitude of a handmaid, a \'hero\', or a child. A
hero\'s attitude is to please Her even as a man pleases a woman through
intercourse.

\"The worship of Śakti is extremely difficult. It is no joke. I passed
two years as the handmaid and companion of the Divine Mother. But my
natural attitude has always been that of a child toward its mother. I
regard the breasts of any woman as those of my own mother.

**Master\'s attitude toward women**

\"Women are, all of them, the veritable images of Śakti. In northwest
India the bride holds a knife in her hand

at the time of marriage; in Bengal, a nut-cutter. The meaning is that
the bridegroom, with the help of the bride, who is the embodiment of the
Divine Power, will sever the bondage of illusion. This is the \'heroic\'
attitude. I never worshipped the Divine Mother that way. My attitude
toward Her is that of a child toward its mother.

\"The bride is the very embodiment of Śakti. Haven\'t you noticed, at
the marriage ceremony, how the groom sits behind like an idiot? But the
bride - she is so bold!

**His love for Narendra**

\"After attaining God one forgets His external splendour; the glories of
His creation. One doesn\'t think of God\'s glories after one has seen
Him. The devotee, once immersed in God\'s Bliss, doesn\'t calculate any
more about outer things. When I see Narendra, I don\'t need to ask him:
\'What\'s your name? Where do you live?\' Where is the time for such
questions? Once a man asked Hanuman which day of the fortnight it was.
\'Brother,\' said Hanuman, \'I don\'t know anything of the day of the
week, or the fortnight, or the position of the stars. I think of Rama
alone.\' \"

**October 16, 1882**

It was Monday, a few days before the Durga Puja, the festival of the
Divine Mother. Sri Ramakrishna was in a very happy state of mind, for
Narendra was with him. Narendra had brought two or three young members
of the Brahmo Samaj to the temple garden. Besides these, Rakhal, Ramlal,
Hazra, and M. were with the Master.

Narendra had his midday meal with Sri Ramakrishna. Afterwards a
temporary bed was made on the floor of the Master\'s room so that the
disciples might rest awhile. A mat was spread, over which was placed a
quilt covered with a white sheet. A few cushions and pillows completed
the simple bed. Like a child, the Master sat near Narendranath on the
bed. He talked with the devotees in great delight. With a radiant smile
lighting his face, and his eyes fixed on Narendra, he was giving them
various spiritual teachings, interspersing these with incidents from his
own life.

MASTER: \"After I had experienced samādhi, my mind craved intensely to
hear only about God. I would always search for places where they were
reciting or explaining the sacred books, such as the Bhagavata, the
Mahabharata, and the Adhyātma Rāmāyana. I used to go to Krishnakishore
to hear him read the Adhyātma Rāmāyana.

**Krishnakishore\'s faith**

\"What tremendous faith Krishnakishore had! Once, while at Vrindāvan, he
felt thirsty and went to a well. Near it he saw a man standing. On being
asked to draw a little water for him, the man said: \'I belong to a low
caste, sir. You are a brahmin. How can I draw water for you?\'
Krishnakishore said: \'Take the name of Śiva. By repeating His holy name
you will make yourself pure.\' The low-caste man did as he was told, and
Krishnakishore, orthodox brahmin that he was, drank that water. What
tremendous faith!

\"Once a holy man came to the bank of the Ganges and lived near the
bathing-ghat at Ariadaha, not far from Dakshineswar. We thought of
paying him a visit. I said to Haladhāri: \'Krishnakishore and I are
going to see a holy man. Will you come with us?\' Haladhāri replied,
\'What is the use of seeing a mere human body, which is no better than a
cage of clay?\' Haladhāri was a student of the Gita and Vedanta
philosophy, and therefore referred to the holy man as a mere \'cage of
clay\'. I repeated this to Krishnakishore. With great anger he said:
\'How impudent of Haladhāri to make such a remark! How can he ridicule
as a \"cage of clay\" the body of a man who constantly thinks of God,
who meditates on Rama, and has renounced all for the sake of the Lord?
Doesn\'t he know that such a man is the embodiment of Spirit?\' He was
so upset by Haladhāri\'s remarks that he would turn his face away from
him whenever he met him in the temple garden, and stopped speaking to
him.

\"Once Krishnakishore asked me, \'Why have you cast off the sacred
thread?\' In those days of God-vision I felt

as if I were passing through the great storm of Āświn, and everything
had blown away from me. No trace of my old self was left. I lost all
consciousness of the world. I could hardly keep my cloth on my body, not
to speak of the sacred thread! I said to Krishnakishore, \'Ah, you will
understand if you ever happen to be as intoxicated with God as I was.\'

\"And it actually came to pass. He too passed through a God-intoxicated
state, when he would repeat only the word \'Om\' and shut himself up
alone in his room. His relatives thought he was actually mad, and called
in a physician. Ram Kaviraj of Natagore came to see him. Krishnakishore
said to the physician, \'Cure me, sir, of my malady, if you please, but
not of my Om.\' (All laugh.)

\"One day I went to see him and found him in a pensive mood. When I
asked him about it, he said: \'The tax-collector was here. He threatened
to dispose of my brass pots, my cups, and my few utensils, if I didn\'t
pay the tax; so I am worried.\' I said: \'But why should you worry about
it? Let him take away your pots and pans. Let him arrest your body even.
How will that affect you? For your nature is that of Kha!\' (Narendra
and the others laugh.) He used to say to me that he was the Spirit,
all-pervading as the sky. He had got that idea from the Adhyātma
Rāmāyana. I used to tease him now and then, addressing him as \'Kha\'.
Therefore I said to him that day, with a smile: \'You are Kha. Taxes
cannot move you!\'

**Master\'s outspokenness**

\"In that state of God-intoxication I used to speak out my mind to all.
I was no respecter of persons. Even to men of position I was not afraid
to speak the truth.

\"One day Jatindra came to the garden of Jadu Mallick. I was there too.
I asked him: \'What is the duty of man? Isn\'t it our duty to think of
God?\' Jatindra replied: \'We are worldly people. How is it possible for
us to achieve liberation? Even King Yudhisthira had to have a vision of
hell.\' This made me very angry. I said to him: \'What sort of man are
you? Of all the incidents of Yudhisthira\'s life, you remember only his
seeing hell. You don\'t remember his truthfulness, his forbearance, his
patience, his discrimination, his dispassion, his devotion to God.\' I
was about to say many more things, when Hriday stopped my mouth. After a
little while Jatindra left the place, saying he had some other business
to attend to.

\"Many days later I went with Captain to see Rājā Sourindra Tagore. As
soon as I met him, I said, \'I can\'t address you as \"Rājā\", or by any
such title, for I should be telling a lie.\' He talked to me a few
minutes, but even so our conversation was interrupted by the frequent
visits of Europeans and others. A man of rajasic temperament, Sourindra
was naturally busy with many things. Jatindra his eldest brother, had
been told of my coming, but he sent word that he had a pain in his
throat and couldn\'t go out.

\"One day, in that state of divine intoxication, I went to the
bathing-ghat on the Ganges at Baranagore. There I saw Jaya Mukherji
repeating the name of God; but his mind was on something else. I went up
and slapped him twice on the cheeks.

\"At one time Rani Rasmani was staying in the temple garden. She came to
the shrine of the Divine Mother, as she frequently did when I worshipped
Kāli, and asked me to sing a song or two. On this occasion, while I was
singing, I noticed she was sorting the flowers for worship
absent-mindedly. At once I slapped her on the cheeks. She became quite
embarrassed and sat there with folded hands.

\"Alarmed at this state of mind myself, I said to my cousin Haladhāri:
\'Just see my nature! How can I get rid of it?\' After praying to the
Divine Mother for some time with great yearning, I was able to shake off
this habit.

**His anguish at worldly talk**

\"When one gets into such a state of mind, one doesn\'t enjoy any
conversation but that about God. I used to weep when I heard people talk
about worldly matters. When I accompanied Mathur Babu on a pilgrimage,
we spent a few days in Benares at Raja Babu\'s house. One day I was
seated in the drawing-room with Mathur Babu, Raja Babu, and others.
Hearing them talk about various worldly things, such as their business
losses and so forth, I wept bitterly and said to the Divine Mother:
\'Mother, where have You brought me? I was much

better off in the temple garden at Dakshineswar. Here I am in a place
where I must bear about \"woman and gold\". But at Dakshineswar I could
avoid it.\' \"

The Master asked the devotees, especially Narendra, to rest awhile, and
he himself lay down on the smaller couch.

**His ecstasy in Kirtan**

Late in the afternoon Narendra sang. Rakhal, Lātu, M., Hazra, and Priya,
Narendra\'s Brahmo friend, were present. The singing was accompanied by
the drum:

> *Meditate, O my mind, on the Lord Hari,*
>
> *The Stainless One, Pure Spirit through and through.*
>
> *How peerless is the light that in Him shines!*
>
> *How soul-bewitching is His wondrous form!*
>
> *How dear is He to all His devotees!*

After this song Narendra sang:

> *Oh, when will dawn for me that day of blessedness*
>
> *When He who is all Good, all Beauty, and all Truth,*
>
> *Will light the inmost shrine of my heart?*
>
> *When shall I sink at last, ever beholding Him,*
>
> *Into that Ocean of Delight?*
>
> *Lord, as Infinite Wisdom Thou shalt enter my soul,*
>
> *And my unquiet mind, made speechless by Thy sight,*
>
> *Will find a haven at Thy feet.*
>
> *In my heart\'s firmament, O Lord, Thou wilt arise*
>
> *As Blissful Immortality;*
>
> *And as, when the chakora beholds the rising moon,*
>
> *It sports about for very joy,*
>
> *So, too, shall I be filled with heavenly happiness*
>
> *When Thou appearest unto me.*
>
> *Thou One without a Second, all Peace, the King of Kings!*
>
> *At Thy beloved feet I shall renounce my life*
>
> *And so at last shall gain life\'s goal;*
>
> *1 shall enjoy the bliss of heaven while yet on earth!*
>
> *Where else is a boon so rare bestowed?*
>
> *Then shall I see Thy glory, pure and untouched by stain;*
>
> *As darkness flees from 1ight, so will my darkest sins*
>
> *Desert me at Thy dawn\'s approach.*
>
> *Kindle in me, O Lord, the blazing fire of faith*
>
> *To be the pole-star of my life;*
>
> *O Succour of the weak, fulfil my one desire!*
>
> *Then shall I bathe both day and night*
>
> *In the boundless bliss of Thy Love, and utterly forget*
>
> *Myself, O Lord, attaining Thee.*

Narendra sang again:

> *With beaming face chant the sweet name of God*
>
> *Till in your heart the nectar overflows.*
>
> *Drink of it ceaselessly and share it with all!*
>
> *If ever your heart runs dry, parched by the flames*
>
> *Of worldly desire, chant the sweet name of God,*
>
> *And heavenly love will moisten your arid soul.*
>
> *Be sure, O mind, you never forget to chant*
>
> *His holy name: when danger stares in your face,*
>
> *Call on Him, your Father Compassionate;*
>
> *With His name\'s thunder, snap the fetters of sin!*
>
> *Come, let us fulfil our hearts\' desires*
>
> *By drinking deep of Everlasting Joy,*
>
> *Made one with Him in Love\'s pure ecstasy.*

Now Narendra and the devotees began to sing kirtan, accompanied by the
drum and cymbals. They moved round and round the Master as they sang:

> *Immerse yourself for evermore, O mind,*
>
> *In Him who is Pure Knowledge and Pure Bliss.*

Next they sang:

> *Oh, when will dawn for me that day of blessedness*
>
> *When He who is all Good, all Beauty, and all Truth*
>
> *Will light the inmost shrine of my heart?*

At last Narendra himself was playing on the drums, and he sang with the
Master, full of joy:

> *With beaming face chant the sweet name of God*

When the music was over, Sri Ramakrishna held Narendra in his arms a
long time and said, \"You have made us so happy today!\" The flood-gate
of the Master\'s heart was open so wide, that night, that he could
hardly contain himself for joy. It was eight o\'clock in the evening.
Intoxicated with divine love, he paced the long verandah north of his
room. Now and then he could be heard talking to the Divine Mother.
Suddenly he said in an excited voice, \"What can you do to me?\" Was the
Master hinting that maya was helpless before him, since he had the
Divine Mother for his support?

Narendra, M., and Priya were going to spend the night at the temple
garden. This pleased the Master highly, especially since Narendra would
be with him. The Holy Mother, who was living in the nahabat, had
prepared the supper. Surendra bore the greater part of the Master\'s
expenses. The meal was ready, and the plates were set out on the
southeast verandah of the Masters room.

Near the east door of his room Narendra and the other devotees were
gossiping.

NARENDRA: \"How do you find the young men nowadays?\"

M: \"They are not bad; but they don\'t receive any religious
instructions\".

NARENDRA: \"But from my experience I feel they are going to the dogs.
They smoke cigarettes, indulge in frivolous talk, enjoy foppishness,
play truant, and do everything of that sort. I have even seen them
visiting questionable places.\"

M: \"I didn\'t notice such things during our student days.\"

NARENDRA: \"Perhaps you didn\'t mix with the students intimately. I have
even seen them talking with people of immoral character. Perhaps they
are on terms of intimacy with them.\"

M: \"It is strange indeed.\"

NARENDRA: \"I know that many of them form bad habits. It would be proper
if the guardians of the boys, and the authorities, kept their eyes on
these matters.\"

They Were talking thus when Sri Ramakrishna came to them and asked with
a smile, \"Well, what are you talking about?\"

NARENDRA: \"I have been asking M. about the boys in the schools. The
conduct of students nowadays isn\'t all that it should be.\"

The Master became grave and said to M. rather seriously: \"This kind of
conversation is not good. It isn\'t desirable to indulge in any talk but
talk of God. You are their senior, and you are intelligent. You should
not have encouraged them to talk about such matters.\"

Narendra was then about nineteen years old, and M. about twenty-eight.
Thus admonished, M. felt embarrassed, and the others also fell silent.

While the devotees were enjoying their meal, Sri Ramakrishna stood by
and watched them with intense delight. That night the Master\'s joy was
very great.

After supper the devotees rested on the mat spread on the floor of the
Master\'s room. They began to talk with him. It was indeed a mart of
joy. The Master asked Narendra to sing the song beginning with the line:
\"In Wisdom\'s firmament the moon of Love is rising full.\"

Narendra sang, and other devotees played the drums and cymbals:

> *In Wisdom\'s firmament the moon of Love is rising full,*
>
> *And Love\'s flood-tide, in surging waves, is flowing everywhere.*
>
> *O Lord, how full of bliss Thou art! Victory unto Thee!*
>
> *On every side shine devotees, like stars around the moon;*
>
> *Their Friend, the Lord All-merciful, joyously plays with them.*
>
> *Behold! the gates of paradise today are open wide.*
>
> *The soft spring wind of the New Day raises fresh waves of joy; Gently
> it carries to the earth the fragrance of God\'s Love, Till all the
> yogis, drunk with bliss, are lost in ecstasy.*
>
> *Upon the sea of the world unfolds the lotus of the New Day,*
>
> *And there the Mother sits enshrined in blissful majesty.*
>
> *See how the bees are mad with joy, sipping the nectar there!*
>
> *Behold the Mother\'s radiant face, which so enchants the heart And
> captivates the universe! About Her Lotus Feet Bands of ecstatic holy
> men are dancing in delight.*
>
> *What matchless loveliness is Hers! What infinite content Pervades the
> heart when She appears! O brothers, says Premdas, I humbly beg you,
> one and all, to sing the Mother\'s praise!*

Sri Ramakrishna sang and danced, and the devotees danced around him.

**A devotee\'s dream**

When the song was over, the Master walked up and down the northeast
verandah, where Hazra was seated

with M. The Master sat down there. He asked a devotee, \"Do you ever
have dreams?\"

DEVOTEE: \"Yes, sir. The other day I dreamt a strange dream. I saw the
whole world enveloped in water. There was water on all sides. A few
boats were visible, but suddenly huge waves appeared and sank them. I
was about to board a ship with a few others, when we saw a brahmin
walking over that expanse of water. I asked him, \'How can you walk over
the deep?\' The brahmin said with a smile: \'Oh, there is no difficulty
about that. There is a bridge under the water.\' I said to him, \'Where
are you going?\' \'To Bhawanipur, the city of the Divine Mother\', he
replied. \'Wait a little\', I cried. \'I shall accompany you.\' \"

MASTER: \"Oh. I am thrilled to hear the story!\"

DEVOTEE: \"The brahmin said: \'I am in a hurry. It will take you some
time to get out of the boat. Good-bye.

Remember this path and come after me.

MASTER: \"Oh, my hair is standing on end! Please be initiated by a guru
as soon as possible.\"

Shortly before midnight Narendra and the other devotees lay down on a
bed made on the floor of the Master\'s room.

At dawn some of the devotees were up. They saw the Master, naked as a
child, pacing up and down the room, repeating the names of the various
gods and goddesses. His voice was sweet as nectar. Now he would look at
the Ganges, now stop in front of the pictures hanging on the wall and
bow down before them, chanting all the while the holy names in his sweet
voice. He chanted: \"Veda, Purana, Tantra; Gita, Gayatri; Bhagavata,
Bhakta, Bhagavan.\" Referring to the Gita, he repeated many times,
\"Tagi, tagi, tagi.\" Now and then he would say: \"O Mother, Thou art
verily Brahman, and Thou art verily Śakti. Thou art Purusha and Thou art
Prakriti. Thou art Virat. Thou art the Absolute, and Thou dost manifest
Thyself as the Relative. Thou art verily the twenty-four cosmic
principles.\"

In the mean time the morning service had begun in the temples of Kāli
and Radhakanta. Sounds of conch-shells and cymbals were carried on the
air. The devotees came outside the room and saw the priests and servants
gathering flowers in the garden for the divine service in the temples.
From the nahabat floated the sweet melody of musical instruments,
befitting the morning hours.

Narendra and the other devotees finished their morning duties and came
to the Master. With a sweet smile on his lips Sri Ramakrishna was
standing on the northeast verandah, close to his own room.

NARENDRA: \"We noticed several sannyasis belonging to the sect of Nanak
in the Panchavati.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, they arrived here yesterday. (To Narendra) I\'d like to
see you all sitting together on the mat.\"

As they sat there the Master looked at them with evident delight. He
then began to talk with them. Narendra asked about spiritual discipline.

MASTER: \"Bhakti, love of God, is the essence of all spiritual
discipline. Through love one acquires renunciation and discrimination
naturally.\"

**Disciplines of Tantra**

NARENDRA: \"Isn\'t it true that the Tantra prescribes spiritual
discipline in the company of woman?\"

MASTER: \"That is not desirable. It is a very difficult path and often
causes the aspirant\'s downfall. There are three such kinds of
discipline. One may regard woman as one\'s mistress or look on oneself
as her handmaid or as her child. I look on woman as my mother. To look
on oneself as her handmaid is also good; but it is extremely difficult
to practise spiritual discipline looking on woman as one\'s mistress. To
regard oneself as her child is a very pure attitude.\"

The sannyasis belonging to the sect of Nanak entered the room and
greeted the Master, saying, \"Namo

Narayanaya.\" Sri Ramakrishna asked them to sit down.

**All is possible with God**

MASTFR: \"Nothing is impossible for God. Nobody can describe His nature
in words. Everything is possible for Him. There lived at a certain place
two yogis who were practising spiritual discipline. The sage Narada was
passing that way one day. Realizing who he was, one of the yogis said:
\'You have just come from God Himself. What is He doing now?\' Narada
replied, \'Why, I saw Him making camels and elephants pass and repass
through the eye of a needle.\' At this the yogi said: \'Is that anything
to wonder at? Everything is possible for God.\' But the other yogi said:
\'What? Making elephants pass through the eye of a needle - is that ever
possible? You have never been to the Lord\'s dwelling-place.\' \"

At nine o\'clock in the morning, while the Master was still sitting in
his room, Manomohan arrived from Konnagar with some members of his
family. In answer to Sri Ramakrishna\'s kind inquiries, Manomohan
explained that he was taking them to Calcutta. The Master said: \"Today
is the first day of the Bengali month, an inauspicious day for
undertaking a journey. I hope everything will be well with you.\" With a
smile he began to talk of other matters.

When Narendra and his friends had finished bathing in the Ganges, the
Master said to them earnestly: \"Go to the Panchavati and meditate there
under the banyan-tree. Shall I give you something to sit on?\"

**Discrimination and dispassion**

About half past ten Narendra and his Brahmo friends were meditating in
the Panchavati. After a while Sri Ramakrishna came to them. M., too, was
present.

The Master said to the Brahmo devotees: \"In meditation one must be
absorbed in God. By merely floating on the surface of the water, can you
reach the gems lying at the bottom of the sea?\"

Then he sang:

> *Taking the name of Kāli, dive deep down,*
>
> *O mind, Into the heart\'s fathomless depths,*
>
> *Where many a precious gem lies hid.*
>
> *But never believe the bed of the ocean bare of gems*
>
> *If in the first few dives you fail;*
>
> *With firm resolve and self-control*
>
> *Dive deep and make your way to Mother Kāli\'s realm.*
>
> *Down in the ocean depths of heavenly Wisdom lie*
>
> *The wondrous pearls of Peace, O mind;*
>
> *And you yourself can gather them,*
>
> *If you but have pure love and follow the scriptures\' rule.*
>
> *Within those ocean depths, as well,*
>
> *Six alligators, lurk - lust, anger, and the rest -*
>
> *Swimming about in search of prey.*
>
> *Smear yourself with the turmeric of discrimination;*
>
> *The very smell of it will shield you from their jaws.*
>
> *Upon the ocean bed lie strewn*
>
> *Unnumbered pearls and precious gems;*
>
> *Plunge in, says Ramprasad, and gather up handfuls there!*

Narendra and his friends came down from their seats on the raised
platform of the Panchavati and stood near the Master. He returned to his
room with them. The Master continued: \"When you plunge in the water of
the ocean, you may be attacked by alligators. But they won\'t touch you
if your body is smeared with turmeric. There are no doubt six
alligators - lust, anger, avarice, and so on - within you, in the
\'heart\'s fathomless

depths\'. But protect yourself with the turmeric of discrimination and
renunciation, and they won\'t touch you.

**Futility of mere lecturing**

\"What can you achieve by mere lecturing and scholarship without
discrimination and dispassion? God alone is real, and all else is
unreal. God alone is substance, and all else is nonentity. That is
discrimination.

\"First of all set up God in the shrine of your heart, and then deliver
lectures as much as you like. How will the mere repetition of \'Brahma\'
profit you if you are not imbued with discrimination and dispassion? It
is the empty sound of a conch-shell.

\"There lived in a village a young man named Padmalochan. People used to
call him \'Podo\', for short. In this village there was a temple in a
very dilapidated condition. It contained no image of God. Aśwattha and
other plants sprang up on the ruins of its walls. Bats lived inside, and
the floor was covered with dust and the droppings of the bats. The
people of the village had stopped visiting the temple. One day after
dusk the villagers heard the sound of a conch-shell from the direction
of the temple. They thought perhaps someone had installed an image in
the shrine and was performing the evening worship. One of them softly
opened the door and saw Padmalochan standing in a corner, blowing the
conch. No image had been set up. The temple hadn\'t been swept or
washed. And filth and dirt lay everywhere. Then he shouted to Podo:

> *You have set up no image here,*
>
> *Within the shrine, O fool!*
>
> *Blowing the conch, you simply make*
>
> *Confusion worse confounded.*
>
> *Day and night eleven bats*
>
> *Scream there incessantly.*

**Purification of mind**

\"There is no use in merely making a noise if you want to establish the
Deity in the shrine of your heart, if you want to realize God. First of
all purify the mind. In the pure heart God takes His seat. One cannot
bring the holy image into the temple if the droppings of bats are all
around. The eleven bats are our eleven organs: five of action, five of
perception, and the mind.

\"First of all invoke the Deity, and then give lectures to your heart\'s
content. First of all dive deep. Plunge to the bottom and gather up the
gems. Then you may do other things. But nobody wants to plunge. People
are without spiritual discipline and prayer, without renunciation and
dispassion. They learn a few words and immediately start to deliver
lectures. It is difficult to teach others. Only if a man gets a command
from God, after realizing Him, is he entitled to teach.\"

Thus conversing, the Master came to the west end of the verandah. M
stood by his side. Sri Ramakrishna had repeated again and again that God
cannot be realized without discrimination and renunciation. This made M.
extremely worried. He had married and was then a young man of
twenty-eight, educated in college in the Western way. Having a sense of
duty, he asked himself, \"Do discrimination and dispassion mean giving
up \'woman and gold\'?\" He was really at a loss to know what to do.

M. (to the Master): \"What should one do if one\'s wife says: \'You are
neglecting me. I shall commit suicide?\' \"

MASTER (in a serious tone): \"Give up such a wife if she proves an
obstacle in the way of spiritual life. Let her commit suicide or
anything else she likes. The wife that hampers her husband\'s spiritual
life is an ungodly wife.\"

Immersed in deep thought, M. stood leaning against the wall. Narendra
and the other devotees remained silent a few minutes. The Master
exchanged several words with them; then, suddenly going to M., he
whispered in his ear: \"But if a man has sincere love for God, then all
come under his control - the king, wicked persons, and his wife. Sincere
love of God on the husband\'s part may eventually help the wife to lead
a

spiritual life. If the husband is good, then through the grace of God
the wife may also follow his example.\"

This had a most soothing effect on M.\'s worried mind. All the while he
had been thinking: \"Let her commit suicide. What can I do?\"

M. (to the Master): \"This world is a terrible place indeed.\"

MASTER (to the devotees): \"That is the reason Chaitanya said to his
companion Nityananda, \'Listen, brother, there is no hope of salvation
for the worldly-minded.\' \"

On another occasion the Master had said to M. privately: \"Yes, there is
no hope for a worldly man if he is not sincerely devoted to God. But he
has nothing to fear if he remains in the world after realizing God. Nor
need a man have any fear whatever of the world if he attains sincere
devotion by practising spiritual discipline now and then in solitude.
Chaitanya had several householders among his devotees, but they were
householders in name only, for they lived unattached to the world.\"

It was noon. The worship was over, and food offerings had been made in
the temple. The doors of the temple were shut. Sri Ramakrishna sat down
for his meal, and Narendra and the other devotees partook of the food
offerings from the temple.

**Sunday, October 22, 1882**

It was the day of Vijaya, the last day of the celebration of the worship
of Durga, when the clay image is immersed in the water of a lake or
river.

About nine o\'clock in the morning M. was seated on the floor of the
Master\'s room at Dakshineswar, near Sri Ramakrishna, who was reclining
on the small couch. Rakhal was then living with the Master, and Narendra
and Bhavanath visited him frequently. Baburam had seen him only once or
twice.

MASTER: \"Did you have any holiday during the Durga Puja?\"

5888. \"Yes, sir. I went to Keshab\'s house every day for the first
      three days of the worship.\" MASTER: \"Is that so?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
23. \"I heard there a very interesting interpretation of the Durga
    Puja.\" MASTER: \"Please tell me all about it.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
23. \"Keshab Sen held daily morning prayers in his house, lasting till
    ten or eleven. During these prayers he gave the inner meaning of the
    Durga Puja. He said that if anyone could realize the Divine Mother,
    that is to say, could install Mother Durga in the shrine of his
    heart, then Lakshmi, Sarasvati, Kartika, and Ganesa would come there
    of themselves. Lakshmi means wealth, Sarasvati knowledge, Kartika
    strength, and Ganesa success. By realizing the Divine Mother within
    one\'s heart, one gets all these without any effort whatever.\"

Sri Ramakrishna listened to the description, questioning M. now and then
about the prayers conducted by Keshab. At last he said to M.: \"Don\'t
go hither and thither. Come here alone. Those who belong to the inner
circle of my devotees will come only here. Boys like Narendra,
Bhavanath, and Rakhal are my very intimate disciples. They are not to be
thought lightly of. Feed13 them one day. What do you think of
Narendra?\"

23. \"I think very highly of him, sir.\" Narendra\'s many virtues

MASTER: \"Haven\'t you observed his many virtues? He is not only well
versed in music, vocal and instrumental, but he is also very learned.
Besides, he has controlled his passions and declares he will lead a
celibate life. He has been devoted to God since his very boyhood.

**Meditation on God with form**

\"How are you getting along with your meditation nowadays? What aspect
of God appeals to your mind - with form or without form?\"

23. \"Sir, now I can\'t fix my mind on God with form. On the other hand,
    I can\'t concentrate steadily on God without form.\"

MASTER: \"Now you see that the mind cannot be fixed, all of a sudden, on
the formless aspect of God. It is wise to think of God with form during
the primary stages.\"

23. \"Do you mean to suggest that one should meditate on clay images?\"
    MASTER: \"Why clay? These images are the embodiments of
    Consciousness.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
5888. \"Even so, one must think of hands, feet, and the other parts of
      body. But again, I realize that the mind cannot be concentrated
      unless one meditates, in the beginning, on God with form. You have
      told me so. Well, God can easily assume different forms. May one
      meditate on the form of one\'s own mother?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, the mother should be adored. She is indeed an embodiment
of Brahman.\"

M. sat in silence. After a few minutes he asked the Master: \"What does
one feel while thinking of God without form? Isn\'t it possible to
describe it?\" After some reflection, the Master said, \"Do you know
what it is like?\" He remained silent a moment and then said a few words
to M. about one\'s experiences at the time of the vision of God with and
without form.

MASTER: \"You see, one must practise spiritual discipline to understand
this correctly. Suppose, there are treasures in a room. If you want to
see them and lay hold of them, you must take the trouble to get the key
and unlock the door. After that you must take the treasures out. But
suppose the room is locked, and standing outside the door you say to
yourself: \'Here I have opened the door. Now I have broken the lock of
the chest. Now I have taken out the treasure.\' Such brooding near the
door will not enable you to achieve anything. You must practise
discipline.

**Brahman and Divine Incarnations**

\"The jnanis think of God without form. They don\'t accept the Divine
Incarnation. Praising Sri Krishna, Arjuna said, \'Thou art Brahman
Absolute.\' Sri Krishna replied, \'Follow Me, and you will know whether
or not I am Brahman Absolute.\' So saying, Sri Krishna led Arjuna to a
certain place and asked him what he saw there. \'I see a huge tree,\'
said Arjuna, \'and on it I notice fruits hanging like clusters of
blackberries.\' Then Krishna said to Arjuna, \'Come nearer and you will
find that these are not clusters of blackberries, but clusters of
innumerable Krishnas like Me, hanging from the tree.\' In other words,
Divine Incarnations without number appear and disappear on the tree of
the Absolute Brahman.

\"Kavirdas was strongly inclined to the formless God. At the mention of
Krishna\'s name he would say: \'Why should I worship Him? The gopis
would clap their hands while He performed a monkey dance.\' (With a
smile) But I accept God with form when I am in the company of people who
believe in that ideal, and I also agree with those who believe in the
formless God.\"

M. (smiling): \"You are as infinite as He of whom we have been talking.
Truly, no one can fathom your depth.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Ah! I see you have found it out. Let me tell you one
thing. One should follow various paths. One should practise each creed
for a time. In a game of satrancha a piece can\'t reach the centre
square until it completes the circle; but once in the square it can\'t
be overtaken by any other piece.\"

M: \"That is true, sir.\"

MASTER: \"There are two classes of. yogis: the bahudakas and the
kutichakas. The bahudakas roam about visiting various holy places and
have not yet found peace of mind. But the kutichakas, having visited all
the sacred places, have quieted their minds. Feeling serene and
peaceful, they settle down in one place and no longer move about. In
that one place they are happy; they don\'t feel the need of going to any
sacred place. If one of them ever visits a place of pilgrimage, it is
only for the purpose of new inspiration.

\"I had to practise each religion for a time - Hinduism, Islam,
Christianity. Furthermore, I followed the paths of the Saktas,
Vaishnavas, and Vedantists. I realized that there is only one God toward
whom all are travelling; but the paths are different.

\"While visiting the holy places, I would sometimes suffer great agony.
Once I went with Mathur to Raja Babu\'s drawing-room in Benares. I found
that they talked there only of worldly matters - money, real estate, and
the like. At this I burst into tears. I said to the Divine Mother,
weeping: \'Mother! Where hast Thou brought me? I was much better off at
Dakshineswar.\' In Allahabad I noticed the same things that I saw
elsewhere - the same ponds, the same grass, the same trees, the same
tamarind-leaves.

**Master\'s ecstasy at Vrindāvan**

\"But one undoubtedly finds inspiration in a holy place. I accompanied
Mathur Babu to Vrindāvan. Hriday and the ladies of Mathur\'s family were
in our party. No sooner did I see the Kaliyadaman Ghat than a divine
emotion surged up within me. I was completely overwhelmed. Hriday used
to bathe me there as if I were a small child.

\"In the dusk I would walk on the bank of the Jamuna when the cattle
returned along the sandy banks from their pastures. At the very sight of
those cows the thought of Krishna would flash in my mind. I would run
along like a madman, crying: \'Oh, where is Krishna? Where is my
Krishna?\'

\"I went to Syamakunda and Radhakunda in a palanquin and got out to
visit the holy Mount Govardhan. At the very sight of the mount I was
overpowered with divine emotion and ran to the top. I lost all
consciousness of the world around me. The residents of the place helped
me to come down. On my way to the sacred pools of Syamakunda and
Radhakunda, when I saw the meadows, the trees, the shrubs, the birds,
and the deer, I was overcome with ecstasy. My clothes became wet with
tears. I said: \'O Krishna! Everything here is as it was in the olden
days. You alone are absent.\' Seated inside the palanquin I lost all
power of speech. Hriday followed the palanquin. He had warned the
bearers to be careful about me.

\"Gangamayi became very fond of me in Vrindāvan. She was an old woman
who lived all alone in a hut near the Nidhuvan. Referring to my
spiritual condition and ecstasy, she said, \'He is the very embodiment
of Radha.\' She addressed me as \'Dulali\'. When with her, I used to
forget my food and drink, my bath, and all thought of going home. On
some days Hriday used to bring food from home and feed me. Gangamayi
also would serve me with food prepared by her own hands.

\"Gangamayi used to experience trances. At such times a great crowd
would come to see her. One day, in a state of ecstasy, she climbed on
Hriday\'s shoulders.

\"I didn\'t want to leave her and return to Calcutta. Everything was
arranged for me to stay with her. I was to eat double-boiled rice, and
we were to have our beds on either side of the cottage. All the
arrangements had been made, when Hriday said: \'You have such a weak
stomach. Who will look after you?\' \'Why,\' said Gangamayi, \'I shall
look after him. I\'ll nurse him.\' As Hriday dragged me by one hand and
she by the other, I remembered my mother, who was then living alone here
in the nahabat of temple garden. I found it impossible to stay away from
her, and said to Gangamayi, \'No, I must go.\' I loved the atmosphere of
Vrindāvan.\"

About eleven o\'clock the Master took his meal, the offerings from
temple of Kāli. After taking his noonday rest he resumed his
conversation with the devotees. Every now and then he uttered the holy
word \"Om\" or repeated the sacred names of the deities.

After sunset the evening worship was performed in the temples. Since it
was the day of Vijaya, the devotees first saluted the Divine Mother and
then took the dust of the Master\'s feet.

**Tuesday, October 24,1882**

It was three or four o\'clock in the afternoon. The Master was standing
near the shelf where the food was kept, when Balaram and M. arrived from
Calcutta and saluted him. Sri Ramakrishna said to them with a smile: \"I
was going to take some sweets from the shelf, but no sooner did I put my
hand on them than a lizard dropped on my body. At once I removed my
hand. (All laugh.)

\"Oh, yes! One should observe all these things. You see, Rakhal is ill,
and my limbs ache too. Do you know what\'s the matter? This morning as I
was leaving my bed I saw a certain person, whom I took for Rakhal. (All
laugh.) Oh, yes! Physical features should be studied. The other day
Narendra brought one of his friends, a man with only one good eye,
though the other eye was not totally blind. I said to myself, \'What is
this trouble that Narendra has brought with him?\'

\"A certain person comes here, but I can\'t eat any food that he brings.
He works in an office at a salary of twenty rupees and earns another
twenty by writing false bills. I can\'t utter a word in his presence,
because he tells lies. Sometimes he stays here two or three days without
going to his office. Can you guess his purpose? It is that I should
recommend him to someone for a job somewhere else.

\"Balaram comes from a family of devout Vaishnavas. His father, now an
old man, is a pious devotee. He has a tuft of hair on his head, a rosary
of tulsi beads round his neck, and a string of beads in his hand. He
devotes his time to the repetition of God\'s name. He owns much property
in Orissa and has built temples to Radha-Krishna in Kothar, Vrindāvan,
and other places, establishing free guest-houses as well.

(To Balaram) \"A certain person came here the other day. I understand he
is the slave of that black hag of a wife. Why is it that people do not
see God? It is because of the barrier of \'woman and gold\'. How
impudent he was to say to you the other day, \'A paramahamsa came to my
father, who fed him with chicken curry!\'

\"In my present of my mind I can eat a little fish soup if it has been
offered to the Divine Mother beforehand. I can\'t eat any meat, even if
it is offered to the Divine Mother; but I taste it with the end of my
finger lest She should be angry. (Laughter.)

\"Well, can you explain this state of my mind? Once I was going from
Burdwan to Kamarpukur in a bullock-cart, when a great storm arose. Some
people gathered near the cart. My companions said they were robbers. So
I began to repeat the names of God, calling sometimes on Kāli, sometimes
on Rama, sometimes on Hanuman. What do you think of that?\"

Was the Master hinting that God is one but is addressed differently by
different sects?

MASTER (to Balaram): \"Maya is nothing but \'woman and gold\'. A man
living in its midst gradually loses his spiritual alertness. He thinks
all is well with him. The scavenger carries a tub of night-soil on his
head, and in course of time loses his repulsion to it. One gradually
acquires love of God through the practice of chanting God\'s name and
glories. (To M.) One should not be ashamed of chanting God\'s holy name.
As the saying goes, \'One does not succeed so long as one has these
three: shame, hatred, and fear.\'

\"At Kamarpukur they sing kirtan very well. The devotional music is sung
to the accompaniment of drums.

(To Balaram) \"Have you installed any image at Vrindāvan?\"

BALARAM: \"Yes, sir. We have a grove where Krishna is worshipped.\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 5**

**THE MASTER AND KESHAB**

> October 27, 1882

**Master\'s boat trip with Keshab**

IT WAS FRIDAY, the day of the Lakshmi Puja. Keshab Chandra Sen had
arranged a boat trip on the Ganges for Sri Ramakrishna.

About four o\'clock in the afternoon the steamboat with Keshab and his
Brahmo followers cast anchor in the Ganges alongside the Kāli temple at
Dakshineswar. The passengers saw in front of them the bathing-ghat and
the chandni. To their left, in the temple compound, stood six temples of
Śiva, and to their right another group of six Śiva temples. The white
steeple of the Kāli temple, the tree-tops of the Panchavati, and the
silhouette of pine-trees stood high against the blue autumn sky. The
gardens between the two nahabats were filled with fragrant flowers, and
along the bank of the Ganges were rows of flowering plants. The blue sky
was reflected in the brown water of the river, the sacred Ganges,
associated with the most ancient traditions of Aryan civilization. The
outer world appeared soft and serene, and the hearts of the Brahmo
devotees were filled with peace.

**Master in samādhi**

Sri Ramakrishna was in his room talking with Vijay and Haralal. Some
disciples of Keshab entered. Bowing before the Master, they said to him:
\"Sir, the steamer has arrived. Keshab Babu has asked us to take you
there.\" A small boat was to carry the Master to the steamer. No sooner
did he get into the boat than he lost outer consciousness in samādhi.
Vijay was with him.

M. was among the passengers. As the boat came alongside the steamer, all
rushed to the railing to have a view of Sri Ramakrishna. Keshab became
anxious to get him safely on board. With great difficulty the Master was
brought back to consciousness of the world and taken to a cabin in the
steamer. Still in an abstracted mood, he walked mechanically, leaning on
a devotee for support. Keshab and the others bowed before him, but he
was not aware of them. Inside the cabin there were a few chairs and a
table. He was made to sit on one of the chairs, Keshab and Vijay
occupying two others. Some devotees were also seated, most of them on
the floor, while many others had to stand outside. They peered eagerly
through the door and windows. Sri Ramakrishna again went into deep
samādhi and became totally unconscious of the outer world.

As the air in the room was stuffy because of the crowd of people, Keshab
opened the windows. He was embarrassed to meet Vijay, since they had
differed in certain principles of the Brāhrno Samaj and Vijay had
separated himself from Keshab\'s organization, joining another society.

The Brahmo devotees looked wistfully at the Master. Gradually he came
back to sense consciousness; but the divine intoxication still lingered.
He said to himself in a whisper: \"Mother, why have You brought me here?
They are hedged around and not free. Can I free them?\" Did the Master
find that the people assembled there were locked within the prison walls
of the world? Did their helplessness make the Master address these words
to the Divine Mother?

**God dwells in devotee\'s heart**

Sri Ramakrishna was gradually becoming conscious of the outside world.
Nilmadhav of Ghazipur and a Brahmo devotee were talking about Pavhari
Baba. Another Brahmo devotee said to the Master: \"Sir, these gentlemen
visited Pavhari Baba. He lives in Ghazipur. He is a holy man like
yourself.\" The Master could hardly talk; he only smiled. The devotee
continued, \"Sir, Pavhari Baba keeps your photograph in his room.\"
Pointing to his body the Master said with a smile, \"Just a
pillow-case.\"

The Master continued: \"But you should remember that the heart of the
devotee is the abode of God. He

dwells, no doubt, in all beings, but He especially manifests Himself in
the heart of the devotee. A landlord may at one time or another visit
all parts of his estate, but people say he is generally to be found in a
particular drawing-room. The heart of the devotee is the drawing-room of
God.

**Attitude of jnānis and bhaktās**

\"He who is called Brahman by the jnanis is known as Ātman by the yogis
and as Bhagavan by the bhaktas. The same brahmin is called priest, when
worshipping in the temple, and cook, when preparing a meal in the
kitchen. The jnani sticking to the path of knowledge, always reasons
about the Reality, saying, \'Not this, not this\'. Brahman is neither
\'this\' nor \'that\'; It is neither the universe nor its living beings.
Reasoning in this way, the mind becomes steady. Then it disappears and
the aspirant goes into samādhi. This is the knowledge of Brahman. It is
the unwavering conviction of the jnani that Brahman alone is real and
the world illusory. All these names and forms are illusory, like a
dream. What Brahman is cannot be described. One cannot even say that
Brahman is a Person. This is the opinion of the jnanis, the followers of
Vedanta philosophy.

\"But the bhaktas accept all the states of consciousness. They take the
waking state to be real also. They don\'t think the world to be
illusory, like a dream. They say that the universe is a manifestation of
God\'s power and glory. God has created all these - sky, stars, moon,
sun, mountains, ocean, men, animals. They constitute His glory. He is
within us, in our hearts. Again, He is outside. The most advanced
devotees say that He Himself has become all this - the twenty-four
cosmic principles, the universe, and all living beings. The devotee of
God wants to eat sugar, not to become sugar. (All laugh.)

\"Do you know how a lover of God feels? His attitude is: \'O God, Thou
are the Master, and I am Thy servant. Thou art the Mother, and I am Thy
child.\' Or again: \'Thou art my Father and Mother. Thou art the Whole,
and I am a part.\' He doesn\'t like to say, \'I am Brahman.\'

**Attitude of yogis**

\"The yogi seeks to realize the Paramatman, the Supreme Soul. His ideal
is the union of the embodied soul and the Supreme Soul. He withdraws his
mind from sense-objects and tries to concentrate it on the Paramatman.
Therefore, during the first stage of his spiritual discipline, he
retires into solitude and with undivided attention practises meditation
in a fixed posture.

\"But the Reality is one and the same. The difference is only in name.
He who is Brahman is verily Ātman, and again, He is the Bhagavan. He is
Brahman to the followers of the path of knowledge, Paramatman to the
yogis, and Bhagavan to the lovers of God.\"

The steamer had been going toward Calcutta; but the passengers, with
their eyes fixed on the Master and their ears given to his nectar-like
words, were oblivious of its motion. Dakshineswar, with its temples and
gardens, was left behind. The paddles of the boat churned the waters of
the Ganges with a murmuring sound. But the devotees were indifferent to
all this. Spellbound, they looked on a great yogi, his face lighted with
a divine smile, his countenance radiating love, his eyes sparkling with
joy-a man who had renounced all for God and who knew nothing but God.
Unceasing words of wisdom flowed from his lips.

**Reasoning of jnanis**

MASTIER: \"The jnanis, who adhere to the non-dualistic philosophy of
Vedanta, say that the acts of creation, preservation, and destruction,
the universe itself and all its living beings, are the manifestations of
Śakti, the Divine Power. If you reason it out, you will realize that all
these are as illusory as a dream. Brahman alone is the Reality, and all
else is unreal. Even this very Śakti is unsubstantial, like a dream.

\"But though you reason all your life, unless you are established in
samādhi, you cannot go beyond the jurisdiction of Śakti. Even when you
say, \'I am meditating\', or \'I am contemplating\', still you are
moving in the realm of Śakti, within Its power.

**Identity of Brahman and Śakti**

\"Thus Brahman and Śakti are identical. If you accept the one, you must
accept the other. It is like fire and

its power to burn. If you see the fire, you must recognize its power to
burn also. You cannot think of fire without its power to burn, nor can
you think of the power to burn without fire. You cannot conceive of the
sun\'s rays without the sun, nor can you conceive of the sun without its
rays.

\"What is milk like? Oh, you say, it is something white. You cannot
think of the milk without the whiteness, and again, you cannot think of
the whiteness without the milk.

\"Thus one cannot think of Brahman without Śakti, or of Śakti without
Brahman. One cannot think of the Absolute without the Relative, or of
the Relative without the Absolute.

\"The Primordial Power is ever at play. She is creating, preserving, and
destroying in play, as it were. This Power is called Kāli. Kāli is
verily Brahman, and Brahman is verily Kāli. It is one and the same
Reality. When we think of It as inactive, that is to say, not engaged in
the acts of creation, preservation, and destruction, then we call It
Brahman. But when It engages in these activities, then we call It Kāli
or Śakti. The Reality is one and the same; the difference is in name and
form.

\"It is like water, called in different languages by different names,
such as \'jal\', \'pani\', and so forth. There are three or four ghats
on a lake. The Hindus, who drink water at one place, call it \'jal\'.
The Mussalmans at another place call it \'pani\'. And the English at a
third place call it \'water\'. All three denote one and the same thing,
the difference being in the name only. In the same way, some address the
Reality as \'Allah\', some as \'God\', some as \'Brahman\', some as
\'Kāli\', and others by such names as \'Rama\', \'Jesus\', \'Durga\',
\'Hari.\' \"

**Different manifestations of Kāli**

KESHAB (with a smile): \"Describe to us, sir, in how many ways Kāli, the
Divine Mother, sports in this world.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Oh, She plays in different ways. It is She
alone who is known as Maha-Kāli, Nitya-Kāli, Smasana-Kāli, Raksha-Kāli,
and Syama-Kāli. Maha-Kāli and Nitya-Kāli are mentioned in the Tantra
philosophy. When there were neither the creation, nor the sun, the moon,
the planets, and the earth and when darkness was enveloped in darkness,
then the Mother, the Formless One, Maha-Kāli, the Great Power, was one
with Maha-Kala, the Absolute.

\"Syama-Kāli has a somewhat tender aspect and is worshipped in the Hindu
households. She is the Dispenser of boons and the Dispeller of fear.
People worship Raksha-Kāli, the Protectress, in times of epidemic,
famine, earthquake, drought, and flood. Smasana-Kāli is the embodiment
of the power of destruction. She resides in the cremation ground,
surrounded by corpses, jackals, and terrible female spirits. From Her
mouth flows a stream of blood, from Her neck hangs a garland of human
heads, and around Her waist is a girdle made of human hands.

**Beginning of a cycle**

\"After the destruction of the universe, at the end of a great cycle,
the Divine Mother garners the seeds for the next creation. She is like
the elderly mistress of the house, who has a hotchpotch-pot in which she
keeps different articles for household use. (All laugh.)

\"Oh, yes! Housewives have pots like that, where they keep \'sea-foam\',
blue pills, small bundles of seeds of cucumber, pumpkin, and gourd, and
so on. They take them out when they want them. In the same way, after
the destruction of the universe, my Divine Mother, the Embodiment of
Brahman, gathers together the seeds for the next creation. After the
creation the Primal Power dwells in the universe itself. She brings
forth this phenomenal world and then pervades it. In the Vedas creation
is likened to the spider and its web. The spider brings the web out of
itself and then remains in it. God is the container of the universe and
also what is contained in it.

\"Is Kāli, my Divine Mother, of a black complexion? She appears black
because She is viewed from a distance; but when intimately known She is
no longer so. The sky appears blue at a distance; but look at it close
by and you will find that it has no colour. The water of the ocean looks
blue at a distance, but when you go near

and take it in your hand, you find that it is colourless.\"

The Master became intoxicated with divine love and sang:

> *Is Kāli, my Mother, really black?*
>
> *The Naked One, of blackest hue,*
>
> *Lights the Lotus of the Heart. . . .*

The Master continued: \"Bondage and liberation are both of Her making.
By Her Maya worldly people become entangled in \'woman and gold\', and
again, through Her grace they attain their liberation. She is called
Saviour, and the remover of the bondage that binds one to the world.\"

**Divine Mother\'s sport**

Then the Master sang the following song in his melodious voice:

> *In the world\'s busy market-place, O Syama, Thou art flying kites;*
>
> *High up they soar on the wind of hope, held fast by maya\'s string.*
>
> *Their frames are human skeletons, their sails of the three gunas
> made;*
>
> *But all their curious workmanship is merely for ornament.*
>
> *Upon the kite-strings Thou hast rubbed the manja-paste of
> worldliness,*
>
> *So as to make each straining strand all the more sharp and strong.*
>
> *Out of a hundred thousand kites, at best but one or two break free;*
>
> *And Thou dost laugh and clap Thy hands, O Mother, watching them!*
>
> *On favouring winds, says Ramprasad, the kites set loose will
> speedily*
>
> *Be borne away to the Infinite, across the sea of the world.*

The Master said: \"The Divine Mother is always playful and sportive.
This universe is Her play. She is self-willed and must always have Her
own way. She is full of bliss. She gives freedom to one out of a hundred
thousand.\"

A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"But, sir, if She likes, She can give freedom to all.
Why, then, has She kept us bound to the world?\"

MASTER: \"That is Her will. She wants to continue playing with Her
created beings. In a game of hide-and-seek the running about soon stops
if in the beginning all the players touch the \'granny\'. If all touch
her, then how can the game go on? That displeases her. Her pleasure is
in continuing the game. Therefore the poet said:

> *Out of a hundred thousand kites, at best but one or two break free;
> And Thou dost laugh and clap Thy hands, O Mother, watching them!*

**Reassurance to householders**

\"It is as if the Divine Mother said to the human mind in confidence,
with a sign from Her eye, \'Go and enjoy the world.\' How can one blame
the mind? The mind can disentangle itself from worldliness if, through
Her grace, She makes it turn toward Herself. Only then does it become
devoted to the Lotus Feet of the Divine Mother.\"

Whereupon Sri Ramakrishna, taking upon himself, as it were, the agonies
of all householders, sang a song complaining to the Divine Mother:

> *Mother, this is the grief that sorely grieves my heart,*
>
> *That even with Thee for Mother, and though I am wide awake,*
>
> *There should be robbery in my house.*
>
> *Many and many a time I vow to call on Thee,*
>
> *Yet when the time for prayer comes round, I have forgotten.*
>
> *Now I see it is all Thy trick.*
>
> *As Thou hast never given, so Thou receivest naught;*
>
> *Am I to blame for this, O Mother? Hadst Thou but given,*
>
> *Surely then Thou hadst received;*
>
> *Out of Thine own gifts I should have given to Thee.*
>
> *Glory and shame, bitter and sweet, are Thine alone;*
>
> *This world is nothing but Thy play.*
>
> *Then why, O Blissful One, dost Thou cause a rift in it?*
>
> *Says Ramprasad: Thou hast bestowed on me this mind,*
>
> *And with a knowing wink of Thine eye*
>
> *Bidden it, at the same time, to go and enjoy the world.*
>
> *And so I wander here forlorn through Thy creation,*
>
> *Blasted, as it were, by someone\'s evil glance,*
>
> *Taking the bitter for the sweet,*
>
> *Taking the unreal for the Real.*

The Master continued: \"Men are deluded through Her maya and have become
attached to the world.

> *Says Ramprasad: Thou hast bestowed on me this mind,*
>
> *And with a knowing wink of Thine eye*
>
> *Bidden it, at the same time, to go and enjoy the world.\"*

BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"Sir, can\'t we realize God without complete
renunciation?\"

MASTFR (with a laugh): \"Of course you can! Why should you renounce
everything? You are all right as you are, following the middle path-like
molasses partly solid and partly liquid. Do you know the game of nax?
Having scored the maximum number of points, I am out of the game. I
can\'t enjoy it. But you are very clever. Some of you have scored ten
points, some six, and some five. You have scored just the right number;
so you are not out of the game like me. The game can go on. Why, that\'s
fine! (All laugh.)

\"I tell you the truth: there is nothing wrong in your being in the
world. But you must direct your mind toward God; otherwise you will not
succeed.

Do your duty with one hand and with the other hold to God. After the
duty is over, you will hold to God with both hands.

**Bondage and liberation are of the mind**

\"It is all a question of the mind. Bondage and liberation are of the
mind alone. The mind will take the colour you dye it with. It is like
white clothes just returned from the laundry. If you dip them in red
dye, they will be red. If you dip them in blue or green, they will be
blue or green. They will take only the colour you dip them in, whatever
it may be. Haven\'t you noticed that, if you read a little English, you
at once begin to utter English words: Foot fut it mit? Then you put on
boots and whistle a tune, and so on. It all goes together. Or, if a
scholar studies Sanskrit, he will at once rattle off Sanskrit verses. If
you are in bad company, then you will talk and think like your
companions. On the other hand, when you are in the company of devotees,
you will think and talk only of God.

\"The mind is everything. A man has his wife on one side and his
daughter on the other. He shows his affection to them in different ways.
But his mind is one and the same.

\"Bondage is of the mind, and freedom is also of the mind. A man is free
if he constantly thinks: \'I am a free soul. How can I be bound, whether
I live in the world or in the forest? I am a child of God, the King of
Kings. Who can bind me?\' If bitten by a snake, a man may get rid of its
venom by saying emphatically, \'There is no

poison in me.\' In the same way, by repeating with grit and
determination, \'I am not bound, I am free\', one really becomes so-one
really becomes free.

\"Once someone gave me a book of the Christians. I asked him to read it
to me. It talked about nothing but sin. (To Keshab) Sin is the only
thing one hears of at your Brahmo Samaj, too. The wretch who constantly
says, \'I am bound, I am bound\' only succeeds in being bound. He who
says day and night, \'I am a sinner, I am a sinner\' verily becomes a
sinner.

**Redeeming power of faith**

\"One should have such burning faith in God that one can say: \'What? I
have repeated the name of God, and can sin still cling to me? How can I
be a sinner any more? How can I be in bondage any more?\'

\"If a man repeats the name of God, his body, mind, and everything
become pure. Why should one talk only about sin and hell, and such
things? Say but once, \'O Lord, I have undoubtedly done wicked things,
but I won\'t repeat them.\' And have faith in His name.\"

Sri Ramakrishna became intoxicated with divine love and sang:

> *If only I can pass away repeating Durga\'s name,*
>
> *How canst Thou then, O Blessed One,*
>
> *Withhold from me deliverance,*
>
> *Wretched though I may be? . . .*

**Master\'s prayer**

Then he said: \"To my Divine Mother I prayed only for pure love. I
offered flowers at Her Lotus Feet and prayed to Her: \'Mother, here is
Thy virtue, here is Thy vice. Take them both and grant me only pure love
for Thee. Here is Thy knowledge, here is Thy ignorance. Take them both
and grant me only pure love for Thee. Here is Thy purity, here is Thy
impurity. Take them both, Mother, and grant me only pure love for Thee.
Here is Thy dharma, here is Thy adharma. Take them both, Mother, and
grant me only pure love for Thee.\'

> (To the Brahmo devotees) \"Now listen to a song by Ramprasad:
>
> *Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to Kāli, the Wish-fulfilling
> Tree, And there beneath It gather the four fruits of life. Of your two
> wives, Dispassion and Worldliness, Bring alone Dispassion only, on
> your way to the Tree, And ask her son Discrimination about the Truth.*
>
> *When will you learn to lie, O mind, in the abode of Blessedness,*
>
> *With Cleanliness and Defilement on either side of you?*
>
> *Only when you have found the way*
>
> *To keep these wives contentedly under a single roof,*
>
> *Will you behold the matchless form of Mother Syama.*
>
> *Ego and Ignorance, your parents, instantly banish from your sight;*
>
> *And should Delusion seek to drag you to its hole,*
>
> *Manfully cling to the pillar of Patience.*
>
> *Tie to the post of Unconcern the goats of Vice and Virtue,*
>
> *Killing them with the sword of Knowledge if they rebel.*
>
> *With the children of Worldliness, your first wife, plead from a
> goodly distance,*
>
> *And, if they will not listen, drown them in Wisdom\'s sea.*
>
> *Says Ramprasad: If you do as I say,*
>
> *You can submit a good account, O mind, to the King of Death,*
>
> *And I shall be well pleased with you and call you my darling.*

\"Why shouldn\'t one be able to realize God in this world? King Janaka
had such realization. Ramprasad described the world as a mere
\'framework of illusion\'. But if one loves God\'s hallowed feet, then-

> *This very world is a mansion of mirth;*
>
> *Here I can eat, here drink and make merry.*
>
> *Janaka\'s might was unsurpassed;*
>
> *What did he lack of the world or the Spirit?*
>
> *Holding to one as well as the other,*
>
> *He drank his milk from a brimming cup!* (All laugh.)

\"But one cannot be a King Janaka all of a sudden. Janaka at first
practised much austerity in solitude.

**Solitude for householders**

\"Even if one lives in the world, one must go into solitude now and
then. It will be of great help to a man if he goes away from his family,
lives alone, and weeps for God even for three days. Even if he thinks of
God for one day in solitude, when he has the leisure, that too will do
him good. People shed a whole jug of tears for wife and children. But
who cries for the Lord? Now and then one must go into solitude and
practise spiritual discipline to realize God. Living in the world and
entangled in many of its duties, the aspirant, during the first stage of
spiritual life, finds many obstacles in the path of concentration. While
the trees on the foot-path are young, they must he fenced around;
otherwise they will be destroyed by cattle. The fence is necessary when
the tree is young, but it can be taken away when the trunk is thick and
strong. Then the tree won\'t be hurt even if an elephant is tied to it.

**Malady of worldly people and its cure**

\"The disease of worldliness is like typhoid. And there are a huge jug
of water and a jar of savoury pickles in the typhoid patient\'s room. If
you want to cure him of his illness, you must remove him from that room.
The worldly man is like the typhoid patient. The various objects of
enjoyment are the huge jug of water, and the craving for their enjoyment
is his thirst. The very thought of pickles makes the mouth water; you
don\'t have to bring them near. And he is surrounded with them. The
companionship of woman is the pickles. Hence treatment in solitude is
necessary.

\"One may enter the world after attaining discrimination and dispassion.
In the ocean of the world there are six alligators: lust, anger, and so
forth. But you need not fear the alligators if you smear your body with
turmeric before you go into the water. Discrimination and dispassion are
the turmeric. Discrimination is the knowledge of what is real and what
is unreal. It is the realization that God alone is the real and eternal
Substance and that all else is unreal, transitory, impermanent. And you
must cultivate intense zeal for God. You must feel love for Him and be
attracted to Him. The gopis of Vrindāvan felt the attraction of Krishna.
Let me sing you a song:

> *Listen! The flute has sounded in yonder wood.*
>
> *There I must fly, for Krishna waits on the path.*
>
> *Tell me, friends, will you come along or no?*
>
> *To you my Krishna is merely an empty name;*
>
> *To me He is the anguish of my heart.*
>
> *You hear His flute-notes onlv with your ears,*
>
> *But, oh, I hear them in my deepest soul.*
>
> *I hear His flute calling: \'Radha come out!*
>
> *Without you the grove is shorn of its loveliness.\' \"*

The Master sang the song with tears in his eyes, and said to Keshab and
the other Brahmo devotees: \"Whether you accept Radha and Krishna, or
not, please do accept their attraction for each other. Try to create
that

same yearning in your heart for God. Yearning is all you need in order
to realize Him.\"

Gradually the ebb-tide set in. The steamboat was speeding toward
Calcutta. It passed under the Howrah Bridge and came within sight of the
Botanical Garden. The captain was asked to go a little farther down the
river. The passengers were enchanted with the Master\'s words, and most
of them had no idea of time or of how far they had come.

Keshab began to serve some puffed rice and grated coconut. The guests
held these in the folds of their wearing-cloths and presently started to
eat. Everyone was joyful. The Master noticed, however, that Keshab and
Vijay rather shrank from each other, and he was anxious to reconcile
them.

**Disagreements necessary for enriching life**

MASTEIR (to Keshab): \"Look here. There is Vijay. Your quarrel seems
like the fight between Śiva and Rama. Śiva was Rama\'s s guru. Though
they fought with each other, yet they soon came to terms. But the
grimaces of the ghosts, the followers of Śiva, and the gibberish of the
monkeys, the followers of Rama, would not come to an end! (Loud
laughter.) Such quarrels take place even among one\'s own kith and kin.
Didn\'t Rama fight with His own sons, Lava and Kusa? Again, you must
have noticed how a mother and daughter, living together and having the
same spiritual end in view, observe their religious fast separately on
Tuesdays, each on her own account-as if the welfare of the mother were
different from the welfare of the daughter. But what benefits the one
benefits the other. In like manner, you have a religious society, and
Vijay thinks he must have one too. (Laughter.) But I think all these are
necessary. While Sri Krishna, Himself God Incarnate, played with the
gopis at Vrindāvan, trouble-makers like Jatila and Kutila appeared on
the scene. You may ask why. The answer is that the play does not develop
without trouble-makers. (All laugh.) There is no fun without Jatila and
Kutila. (Loud laughter.)

\"Ramanuja upheld the doctrine of Qualified Non-dualism. But his guru
was a pure non-dualist. They disagreed with each other and refuted each
other\'s arguments. That always happens. Still, to the teacher the
disciple is his own.\"

All rejoiced in the Mastcr\'s company and his words.

MASTER (to Keshab): \"You don\'t look into people\'s natures, before you
make them your disciples, and so they break away from you.

\"All men look alike, to be sure, but they have different natures. Some
have an excess of sattva, others an excess of rajas, and still others an
excess of tamas. You must have noticed that the cakes known as puli all
look alike. But their contents are very different. Some contain
condensed milk, some coconut kernel, and others mere boiled kalai pulse.
(All laugh)

**Master\'s humility**

\"Do you know my attitude? As for myself, I eat, drink, and live
happily. The rest the Divine Mother knows.

Indeed, there are three words that prick my flesh: \'guru\', \'master\',
and \'father\'.

\"There is only one Guru, and that is Satchidananda. He alone is the
Teacher. My attitude toward God is that of a child toward its mother.
One can get human gurus by the million. All want to be teachers. But who
cares to be a disciple?

**Difficulty of preaching**

\"It is extremely difficult to teach others. A man can teach only if God
reveals Himself to him and gives the command. Narada, Sukadeva, and
sages like them had such a command from God, and Sankara had it too.
Unless you have a command from God, who will listen to your words?

\"Don\'t you know how easily the people of Calcutta get excited? The
milk in the kettle puffs up and boils as long as the fire burns
underneath. Take away the fuel and all becomes quiet. The people of
Calcutta love

sensations. You may see them digging a well at a certain place. They say
they want water. But if they strike a stone they give up that place;
they begin at another place. And there, perchance, they find sand; they
give up the second place too. Next they begin at a third. And so it
goes. But it won\'t do if a man only imagines that he has God\'s
command.

\"God does reveal Himself to man and speak. Only then may one receive
His command. How forceful are the words of such a teacher! They can move
mountains. But mere lectures? People will listen to them for a few days
and then forget them. They will never act upon mere words.

\"At Kamarpukur there is a small lake called the Haldarpukur. Certain
people used to befoul its banks every day. Others who came there in the
morning to bathe would abuse the offenders loudly. But next morning they
would find the same thing. The nuisance didn\'t stop. (All laugh.) The
villagers finally informed the authorities about it. A constable was
sent, who put up a notice on the bank which read: \'Commit no
nuisance.\' This stopped the miscreants at once. (All laugh.)

\"To teach others, one must have a badge of authority; otherwise
teaching becomes a mockery. A man who is himself ignorant starts out to
teach others-like the blind leading the blind! Instead of doing good,
such teaching does harm. After the realization of God one obtains an
inner vision. Only then can one diagnose a person\'s spiritual malady
and give instruction.

\"Without the commission from God, a man becomes vain. He says to
himself, \'I am teaching people.\' This vanity comes from ignorance, for
only an ignorant person feels that he is the doer. A man verily becomes
liberated in life if he feels: \'God is the Doer. He alone is doing
everything. I am doing nothing.\' Man\'s sufferings and worries spring
only from his persistent thought that he is the doer.

**Doing good to others**

\"You people speak of doing good to the world. Is the world such a small
thing? And who are you, pray, to do good to the world? First realize
God, see Him by means of spiritual discipline. If He imparts power, then
you can do good to others; otherwise not.\"

A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"Then, sir, we must give up our activities until we
realize God?\"

MASTER: \"No. Why should you? You must engage in such activities as
contemplation, singing His praises, and other daily devotions.\"

BRAHMO: \"But what about our worldly duties-duties associated with our
earning money, and so on?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, you can perform them too, but only as much as you need
for your livelihood. At the same time, you must pray to God in solitude,
with tears in your eyes, that you may be able to perform those duties in
an unselfish manner. You should say to Him: \'O God, make my worldly
duties fewer and fewer; otherwise, O Lord, I find that I forget Thee
when I am involved in too many activities. I may think I am doing
unselfish work, but it turns out to be selfish.\' People who carry to
excess the giving of alms, or the distributing of food among the poor,
fall victims to the desire of acquiring name and fame.

\"Sambhu Mallick once talked about establishing hospitals, dispensaries,
and schools, making roads, digging public reservoirs, and so forth. I
said to him: \'Don\'t go out of your way to look for such works.
Undertake only those works that present themselves to you and are of
pressing necessity-and those also in a spirit of detachment.\' It is not
good to become involved in many activities. That makes one forget God.
Coming to the Kalighat temple, some, perhaps, spend their whole time in
giving alms to the poor. They have no time to see the Mother in the
inner shrine! (Laughter.) First of all manage somehow to see the image
of the Divine Mother, oven by pushing through the crowd. Then you may or
may not give alms, as you wish. You may give to the poor to your
heart\'s content, if you feel that way. Work is only a means to the
realization of God. Therefore I said to Sambhu, \'Suppose God appears
before you; then will you ask Him to build hospitals and dispensaries
for you?\' (Laughter.) A lover of God never says that. He will rather
say: \'O Lord, give me a place at Thy Lotus

Feet. Keep me always in Thy company. Give me sincere and pure love for
Thee.\'

**Path of devotion most elective for Kaliyuga**

\"Karmayoga is very hard indeed. In the Kaliyuga it is extremely
difficult to perform the rites enjoined in the scriptures. Nowadays
man\'s life is centred on food alone. He cannot perform many scriptural
rites. Suppose a man is laid up with fever. If you attempt a slow cure
with the old-fashioned indigenous remedies, before long his life may be
snuffed out. He can\'t stand much delay. Nowadays the drastic \'D
Gupta\' mixture is appropriate. In the Kaliyuga the best way is
bhaktiyoga, the path of devotion-singing the praises of the Lord, and
prayer. The path of devotion alone is the religion for this age. (To the
Brahmo devotees) Yours also is the path of devotion. Blessed you are
indeed that you chant the name of Hari and sing the Divine Mother\'s
glories. I like your attitude. You don\'t call the world a dream like
the non-dualists. You are not Brahmajnanis like them; you are bhaktas,
lovers of God. That you speak of Him as a Person is also good. You are
devotees. You will certainly realize Him if you call on Him with
sincerity and earnestness.\"

The boat cast anchor at Kayalaghat and the passengers prepared to
disembark. On coming outside they noticed that the full moon was up. The
trees, the buildings, and the boats on the Ganges were bathed in its
mellow light. A carriage was hailed for the Master, and M. and a few
devotees got in with him. The Master asked for Keshab. Presently the
latter arrived and inquired about the arrangements made for the
Master\'s return to Dakshineswar. Then he bowed low and took leave of
Sri Ramakrishna.

The carriage drove through the European quarter of the city. The Master
enjoyed the sight of the beautiful mansions on both sides of the well
lighted streets. Suddenly he said: \"I am thirsty. What\'s to be done?\"
Nandalal, Keshab\'s nephew, stopped the carriage before the India Club
and went upstairs to get some water. The Master inquired whether the
glass had been well washed. On being assured that it had been, he drank
the water.

As the carriage went along, the Master put his head out of the window
and looked with childlike enjoyment, at the people, the vehicles, the
horses, and the streets, all flooded with moonlight. Now and then he
heard European ladies singing at the piano. He was in a very happy mood.

The carriage arrived at the house of Suresh Mitra, who was a great
devotee of the Master and whom he addressed affectionately as Surendra.
He was not at home.

The members of the household opened a room on the ground floor for the
Master and his party. The cab fare was to be paid. Surendra would have
taken care of it had he been there. The Master said to a devotee: \"Why
don\'t you ask the ladies to pay the fare? They certainly know that
their master visits us at Dakshineswar. I am not a stranger to
them.\"(All laugh.)

Narendra, who lived in that quarter of the city, was sent for. In the
mean time Sri Ramakrishna and the devotees were invited to the
drawing-room upstairs. The floor of the room was covered with a carpet
and a white sheet. A few cushions were lying about. On the wall hung an
oil painting especially painted for Surendra, in which Sri Ramakrishna
was pointing out to Keshab the harmony of Christianity, Islam, Buddhism,
Hinduism, and other religions. On seeing the picture Keshab had once
said, \"Blessed is the man who conceived the idea.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was talking joyously with the devotees, when Narendra
arrived. This made the Master doubly happy. He said to his young
disciple, \"We had a boat trip with Keshab today. Vijay and many other
Brahmo devotees were there. (Pointing to M.) Ask him what I said to
Keshab and Vijay about the mother and daughter observing their religious
fast on Tuesdays, each on her own account, though the welfare of the one
meant the welfare of the other. I also said to Keshab that
trouble-makers like jatila and Kutila were necessary to lend zest to the
play. (To M.) Isn\'t that so?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. Quite so.\"

It was late. Surendra had not yet returned. The Master had to leave for
the temple garden, and a cab was brought for him. M. and Narendra
saluted him and took their leave. Sri Ramakrishna\'s carriage started
for Dakshineswar through the moonlit streets.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 6**

THE MASTER WITH THE BRAHMO DEVOTEES (I)

> October 28, 1882

IT WAS SATURDAY. The semi-annual Brahmo festival, celebrated each autumn
and spring, was being held in Benimadhav Pal\'s beautiful garden house
at Sinthi, about three miles north of Calcutta. The house stood in a
secluded place suited for contemplation. Trees laden with flowers,
artificial lakes with grassy banks, and green arbours enhanced the
beauty of the grounds. Just as the fleecy clouds were turning gold in
the light of the setting sun, the Master arrived.

Many devotees had attended the morning devotions, and in the afternoon
people from Calcutta and the neighbouring villages joined them.
Shivanath, the great Brahmo devotee whom the Master loved dearly, was
one of the large gathering of members of the Brahmo Samaj who had been
eagerly awaiting Sri Ramakrishna\'s arrival.

When the carriage bringing the Master and a few devotees reached the
garden house, the assembly stood up respectfully to receive him. There
was a sudden silence, like that which comes when the curtain in a
theatre is about to be rung up. People who had been conversing with one
another now fixed their attention on the Master\'s serene face, eager
not to lose one word that might fall from his lips.

**Master\'s joy on seeing Shivanāth**

At the sight of Shivanath the Master cried out joyously: \"Ah! Here is
Shivanath! You see, you are a devotee of God. The very sight of you
gladdens my heart. One hemp-smoker feels very happy to meet another.
Very often they embrace each other in an exuberance of joy.\"

The devotees burst out laughing.

**Worldly people\'s indifference to spiritual life**

MASTER: \"Many people visit the temple garden at Dakshineswar. If I see
some among the visitors indifferent to God, I say to them, \'You had
better sit over there.\' Or sometimes I say, \'Go and see the beautiful
buildings.\' (Laughter.)

\"Sometimes I find that the devotees of God are accompanied by worthless
people. Their companions are immersed in gross worldliness and don\'t
enjoy spiritual talk at all. Since the devotees keep on, for a long
time, talking with me about God, the others become restless. Finding it
impossible to sit there any longer, they whisper to their devotee
friends: \'When shall we be going? How long will you stay here?\' The
devotees say: \'Wait a bit. We shall go after a little while.\' Then the
worldly people say in a disgusted tone: \'Well, then, you can talk. We
shall wait for you in the boat.\' (All laugh.)

**Power of God\'s name**

\"Worldly people will never listen to you if you ask them to renounce
everything and devote themselves whole-heartedly to God. Therefore
Chaitanya and Nitai, after some deliberation, made an arrangement to
attract the worldly. They would say to such persons, \'Come, repeat the
name of Hari, and you shall have a delicious soup of magur fish and the
embrace of a young woman.\' Many people, attracted by the fish and the
woman, would chant the name of God. After tasting a little of the nectar
of God\'s hallowed name, they would soon realize that the \'fish soup\'
really meant the tears they shed for love of God, while the \'young
woman\' signified the earth. The embrace of the woman meant rolling on
the ground in the rapture of divine love.

\"Nitai would employ any means to make people repeat Hari\'s name.
Chaitanya said: \'The name of God has very great sanctity. It may not
produce an immediate result, but one day it must bear fruit. It is like
a seed

that has been left on the cornice of a building. After many days the
house crumbles, and the seed falls on the earth, germinates, and at last
bears fruit.\'

**Three classes of devotees**

\"As worldly people are endowed with sattva, rajas, and tamas, so also
is bakti characterized by the three gunas.

\"Do you know what a worldly person endowed with sattva is like? Perhaps
his house is in a dilapidated condition here and there. He doesn\'t care
to repair it. The worship hall may be strewn with pigeon droppings and
the courtyard covered with moss, but he pays no attention to these
things. The furniture of the house may be old; he doesn\'t think of
polishing it and making it look neat. He doesn\'t care for dress at all;
anything is good enough for him. But the man himself is very gentle,
quiet, kind, and humble; he doesn\'t injure anyone.

\"Again, among the worldly there are people with the traits of rajas.
Such a man has a watch and chain, and two or three rings on his fingers.
The furniture of his house is all spick and span. On the walls hang
portraits of the Queen, the Prince of Wales, and other prominent people;
the building is whitewashed and spotlessly clean. His wardrobe is filled
with a large assortment of clothes; even the servants have their livery,
and all that.

\"The traits of a worldly man endowed with tamas are sleep, lust, anger,
egotism, and the like.

**Three kinds of bhakti**

\"Similarly, bhakti, devotion, has its sattva. A devotee who possesses
it meditates on God in absolute secret, perhaps inside his mosquito net.
Others think he is asleep. Since he is late in getting up, they think
perhaps he has not slept well during the night. His love for the body
goes only as far as appeasing his hunger, and that only by means of rice
and simple greens. There is no elaborate arrangement about his meals, no
luxury in clothes, and no display of furniture. Besides, such a devotee
never flatters anybody for money.

\"An aspirant possessed of rajasic bhakti puts a tilak on his forehead
and a necklace of holy rudraksha beads, interspersed with gold ones,
around his neck. (All laugh.) At worship he wears a silk cloth.

\"A man endowed with tamasic bhakti has burning faith. Such a devotee
literally extorts boons from God, even as a robber falls upon a man and
plunders his money. \'Bind! Beat! Kill!\'-that is his way, the way of
the dacoits.\"

**Utilizing *Tamas* for spiritual welfare**

Saying this, the Master began to sing in a voice sweet with rapturous
love, his eyes turned upward:

> *Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas, So
> long as I can breathe my last with Kāli\'s name upon my lips? What
> need of rituals has a man, what need of devotions any more, If he
> repeats the Mother\'s name at the three holy hours? Rituals may pursue
> him close, but never can they overtake him.*
>
> *Charity, vows, and giving of gifts do not appeal to Madan\'s mind;*
>
> *The Blissful Mother\'s Lotus Feet are his whole prayer and
> sacrifice.*
>
> *Who could ever have conceived the power Her name possesses?*
>
> *Śiva Himself, the God of Gods, sings Her praise with His five
> mouths!*

The Master was beside himself with love for the Divine Mother. He sang
with fiery enthusiasm:

> *If only I can pass away repeating Durga\'s name,*
>
> *How canst Thou then, O Blessed One,*
>
> *Withhold from me deliverance,*
>
> *Wretched though I may be? . . .*

Then he said, \"One must take the firm attitude: \'What? I have chanted
the Mother\'s name. How can I be a sinner any more? I am Her child, heir
to Her powers and glories.\'

\"If you can give a spiritual turn to your tamas, you can realize God
with its help. Force your demands on God. He is by no means a stranger
to you. He is indeed your very own.

**Illustration of physicians**

\"Again, you see, the quality of tamas can be used for the welfare of
others. There are three classes of physicians: superior, mediocre, and
inferior. The physician who feels the patient\'s pulse and just says to
him, \'Take the medicine regularly\' belongs to the inferior class. He
doesn\'t care to inquire whether or not the patient has actually taken
the medicine. The mediocre physician is he who in various ways persuades
the patient to take the medicine, and says to him sweetly: \'My good
man, how will you be cured unless you use the medicine? Take this
medicine. I have made it for you myself.\' But he who, finding the
patient stubbornly refusing to take the medicine, forces it down his
throat, going so far as to put his knee on the patient\'s chest, is the
best physician. This is the manifestation of the tamas of the physician.
It doesn\'t injure the patient; on the contrary, it does him good.

**Three types of gurus**

\"Like the physicians, there are three types of religious teachers. The
inferior teacher only gives instruction to the disciples but makes no
inquiries about their progress. The mediocre teacher, for the good of
the student, makes repeated efforts to bring the instruction home to
him, begs him to assimilate it, and shows him love in many other ways.
But there is a type of teacher who goes to the length of using force
when he finds the student persistently unyielding; I call him the best
teacher.\"

**No finality about God\'s nature**

A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"Sir, has God forms or has He none?\"

MASTER: \"No one can say with finality that God is only \'this\' and
nothing else. He is formless, and again He has forms. For the bhakta He
assumes forms. But He is formless for the jnani, that is, for him who
looks on the world as a mere dream. The bhakta feels that he is one
entity and the world another. Therefore God reveals Himself to him as a
Person. But the jnani-the Vedantist, for instance-always reasons,
applying the process of \'Not this, not this\'. Through this
discrimination he realizes, by his inner perception, that the ego and
the universe are both illusory, like a dream. Then the jnani realizes
Brahman in his own consciousness. He cannot describe what Brahman is.

\"Do you know what I mean? Think of Brahman, Existence-Knowledge-Bliss
Absolute, as a shoreless ocean. Through the cooling influence, as it
were, of the bhakta\'s love, the water has frozen at places into blocks
of ice. In other words, God now and then assumes various forms for His
lovers and reveals Himself to them as a Person. But with the rising of
the sun of Knowledge, the blocks of ice melt. Then one doesn\'t feel any
more that God is a Person, nor does one see God\'s forms. What He is
cannot be described. Who will describe Him? He who would do so
disappears. He cannot find his \'I\' any more.

**Illusoriness of \"I\"**

\"If one analyses oneself, one doesn\'t find any such thing as \'I\'.
Take an onion, for instance. First of all you peel off the red outer
skin; then you find thick white skins. Peel these off one after the
other, and you won\'t find anything inside.

\"In that state a man no longer finds the existence of his ego. And who
is there left to seek it? Who can describe how he feels in that state-in
his own Pure Consciousness-about the real nature of Brahman? Once a salt
doll went to measure the depth of the ocean. No sooner was it in the
water than it melted. Now who was to tell the depth?

**Sign of Perfect Knowledge**

\"There is a sign of Perfect Knowledge. Man becomes silent when It is
attained. Then the \'I\', which may be likened to the salt doll, melts
in the Ocean of Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute and becomes one with
It. Not the slightest trace of distinction is left.

\"As long as his self-analysis is not complete, man argues with much
ado. But he becomes silent when he completes it. When the empty pitcher
has been filled with water, when the water inside the pitcher becomes
one with the water of the lake outside, no more sound is heard. Sound
comes from the pitcher as long as the pitcher is not filled with water.

\"People used to say in olden days that no boat returns after having
once entered the \'black waters\' of the ocean.

\"All trouble and botheration come to an end when the \'I\' dies. You
may indulge in thousands of reasoning, but still the \'I\' doesn\'t
disappear. For people like you and me, it is good to have the feeling,
\'I am a lover of God.\'

**Personal God for devotees**

\"The Saguna Brahman is meant for the bhaktas. In other words, a bhakta
believes that God has attributes and reveals Himself to men as a Person,
assuming forms. It is He who listens to our prayers. The prayers that
you utter are directed to Him alone. You are bhaktas, not jnanis or
Vedantists. It doesn\'t matter whether you accept God with form or not.
It is enough to feel that God is a Person who listens to our prayers,
who creates, preserves, and destroys the universe, and who is endowed
with infinite power.

\"It is easier to attain God by following the path of devotion.\"

BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"Sir, is it possible for one to see God? If so, why
can\'t we see Him?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, He can surely be seen. One can see His forms, and His
formless aspect as well. How can I explain that to you?\"

**Intense longing enables one to see God**

BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"What are the means by which one can see God?\"

MASTER: \"Can you weep for Him with intense longing of heart? Men shed a
jugful of tears for the sake of their children, for their wives, or for
money. But who weeps for God? So long as the child remains engrossed
with its toys, the mother looks after her cooking and other household
duties. But when the child no longer relishes the toys, it throws them
aside and yells for its mother. Then the mother takes the rice-pot down
from the hearth, runs in haste, and takes the child in her arms.\"

**Why so much controversy about God?**

BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"Sir, why are there so many different opinions about
the nature of God? Some say that God has form, while others say that He
is formless. Again, those who speak of God with form tell us about His
different forms. Why all this controversy?\"

MASTER: \"A devotee thinks of God as he sees Him. In reality there is no
confusion about God. God explains all this to the devotee if the devotee
only realizes Him somehow. You haven\'t set your foot in that direction.
How can you expect to know all about God?

**Parable of the chameleon**

\"Listen to a story. Once a man entered a wood and saw a small animal on
a tree. He came back and told another man that he had seen a creature of
a beautiful red colour on a certain tree. The second man replied: \'When
I went into the wood, I also saw that animal. But why do you call it
red? It is green.\' Another man who was present contradicted them both
and insisted that it was yellow. Presently others arrived and contended
that it was grey, violet, blue, and so forth and so on. At last they
started quarrelling among themselves. To

settle the dispute they all went to the tree. They saw a man sitting
under it. On being asked, he replied: \'Yes, I live under this tree and
I know the animal very well. All your descriptions are true. Sometimes
it appears red, sometimes yellow, and at other times blue, violet, grey,
and so forth. It is a chameleon. And sometimes it has no colour at all.
Now it has a colour, and now it has none.\'

\"In like manner, one who constantly thinks of God can know His real
nature; he alone knows that God reveals Himself to seekers in various
forms and aspects. God has attributes; then again He has none. Only the
man who lives under the tree knows that the chameleon can appear in
various colours, and he knows, further, that the animal at times has no
colour at all. It is the others who suffer from the agony of futile
argument.

\"Kabir used to say, \'The formless Absolute is my Father, and God with
form is my Mother.\'

\"God reveals Himself in the form which His devotee loves most. His love
for the devotee knows no bounds. It is written in the Purana that God
assumed the form of Rama for His heroic devotee, Hanuman.

**Vedantic Non-dualism**

\"The forms and aspects of God disappear when one discriminates in
accordance with the Vedanta philosophy. The ultimate conclusion of such
discrimination is that Brahman alone is real and this world of names and
forms illusory. It is possible for a man to see the forms of God, or to
think of Him as a Person, only so long as he is conscious that he is a
devotee. From the standpoint of discrimination this \'ego of a devotee\'
keeps him a little away from God.

\"Do you know why images of Krishna or Kāli are three and a half cubits
high? Because of distance. Again, on account of distance the sun appears
to be small. But if you go near it you will find the sun so big that you
won\'t be able to comprehend it. Why have images of Krishna and Kāli a
dark-blue colour? That too is on account of distance, like the water of
a lake, which appears green, blue, or black from a distance. Go near,
take the water in the palm of your hand, and you will find that it has
no colour. The sky also appears blue from a distance. Go near and you
will see that it has no colour at all.

\"Therefore I say that in the light of Vedantic reasoning Brahman has no
attributes. The real nature of Brahman cannot be described. But so long
as your individuality is real, the world also is real, and equally real
are the different forms of God and the feeling that God is a Person.

\"Yours is the path of bhakti. That is very good; it is an easy path.
Who can fully know the infinite God? and what need is there of knowing
the Infinite? Having attained this rare human birth, my supreme need is
to develop love for the Lotus Feet of God.

\"If a jug of water is enough to remove my thirst, why should I measure
the quantity of water in a lake? I become drunk on even half a bottle of
wine-what is the use of my calculating the quantity of liquor in the
tavern? What need is there of knowing the Infinite?

\"The various states of mind of the Brahmajnani are described in the
Vedas. The path of knowledge is extremely difficult. One cannot obtain
jnāna if one has the least trace of worldliness and the slightest
attachment to \'woman and gold\'. This is not the path for the Kaliyuga.

**Seven planes of the mind**

\"The Vedas speak of seven planes where the mind dwells. When the mind
is immersed in worldliness it dwells in the three lower planes- at the
naval, the organ of generation, and the organ of evacuation. In that
state the mind loses all its higher visions-it broods only on \'woman
and gold\'. The fourth plane of the mind is at the heart. When the mind
dwells there, one has the first glimpse of spiritual consciousness. One
sees light all around. Such a man, perceiving the divine light, becomes
speechless with wonder and says: \'Ah! What is this? What is this?\' His
mind does not go downward to the objects of the world.

\"The fifth plane of the mind is at the throat. When the mind reaches
this, the aspirant becomes free from all

ignorance and illusion. He does not enjoy talking or hearing about
anything but God. If people talk about worldly things, he leaves the
place at once.

\"The sixth plane is at the forehead. When the mind reaches it, the
aspirant sees the form of God day and night. But even then a little
trace of ego remains. At the sight of that incomparable beauty of God\'s
form, one becomes intoxicated and rushes forth to touch and embrace it.
But one doesn\'t succeed. It is like the light inside a lantern. One
feels as if one could touch the light, but one cannot on account of the
pane of glass.

\"In the top of the head is the seventh plane. When the mind rises
there, one goes into samādhi. Then the Brahmajnani directly perceives
Brahman. But in that state his body does not last many days. He remains
unconscious of the outer world. If milk is poured into his mouth, it
runs out. Dwelling on this plane of consciousness, he gives up his body
in twenty-one days. That is the condition of the Brahmajnani. But yours
is the path of devotion. That is a very good and easy path.

\"Once a man said to me, \'Sir, can you teach me quickly the thing you
call samādhi?\' (All laugh.)

**Duties drop away with deepening of spiritual mood**

\"After a man has attained samādhi all his actions drop away. All
devotional activities, such as worship, japa, and the like, as well as
all worldly duties, cease to exist for such a person. At the beginning
there is much ado about work. As a man makes progress toward God, the
outer display of his work becomes less and less-so much so that he
cannot even sing the name and glories of God. (To Shivanath) As long as
you were not here at the meeting, people talked a great deal about you
and discussed your virtues. But no sooner did you arrive here than all
that stopped. Now the very sight of you makes everyone happy. People now
simply say, \'Ah! Here is Shivanath Babu.\' All other talk about you has
stopped.

**What happens after samādhi**

\"After attaining samādhi, I once went to the Ganges to perform tarpan.
But as I took water in the palm of my hand, it trickled down through my
fingers. Weeping, I said to Haladhāri, \'Cousin, what is this?\'
Haladhāri replied, \'It is called galitahasta in the holy books.\' After
the vision of God, such duties as the performance of tarpan drop away.

\"In the kirtan the devotee first sings, \'Nitai amar mata hati.\' As
the devotional mood deepens, he simply sings, \'Hati! Hati!\' Next, all
he can sing is \'Hati\'. And last of all he simply sings, \'Ha!\' and
goes into samādhi. The man who has been singing all the while then
becomes speechless.

\"Again, at a feast given to the brahmins one at first hears much noise
of talking. When the guests sit on the floor with leaf-plates in front
of them, much of the noise ceases. Then one hears only the cry, \'Bring
some luchi!\'

As they partake of the luchi and other dishes, three quarters of the
noise subsides. When the curd, the last course, appears, one hears only
the sound \'soop, soop\' as the guests eat the curd with their fingers.
Then there is practically no noise. Afterwards all retire to sleep, and
absolute silence reigns.

\"Therefore I say, at the beginning of religious life a man makes much
ado about work, but as his mind dives deeper into God, he becomes less
active. Last of all comes the renunciation of work, followed by samādhi.

\"Generally the body does not remain alive after the attainment of
samādhi. The only exceptions are such sages as Narada, who keep their
bodies alive in order to bring spiritual light to others. It is also
true of Divine Incarnations, like Chaitanya. After the well is dug, one
generally throws away the spade and the basket. But some keep them in
order to help their neighbours. The great souls who retain their bodies
after samādhi feel compassion for the suffering of others. They are not
so selfish as to be satisfied with their own illumination. You are well
aware of the nature of selfish people. If you ask them to spit at a
particular place, they won\'t, lest it should do you good. If you ask
them to bring a sweetmeat worth a cent from the store, they will perhaps
lick it on the way back. (All laugh.)

\"But the manifestations of Divine Power are different in different
beings. Ordinary souls are afraid to teach others. A piece of worthless
timber may itself somehow float across the water, but it sinks even
under the weight of a bird. Sages like Narada are like a heavy log of
wood, which not only floats on the water but also can carry men, cows,
and even elephants.

(To Shivanath and the other Brahmo devotees) \"Can you tell me why you
dwell so much on the powers and glories of God? I asked the same thing
of Keshab Sen. One day Keshab and his party came to the temple garden at
Dakshineswar. I told them I wanted to hear how they lectured. A meeting
was arranged in the paved courtyard above the bathing-ghat on the
Ganges, where Keshab gave a talk. He spoke very well. I went into a
trance. After the lecture I said to Keshab, \'Why do you so often say
such things as: \"O God, what beautiful flowers Thou hast made! O God,
Thou hast created the heavens, the stars, and the ocean!\" and so on?\'
Those who love splendour themselves are fond of dwelling on God\'s
splendour.

\"Once a thief stole the jewels from the images in the temple of
Radhakanta. Mathur Babu entered the temple and said to the Deity: \'What
a shame, O God! You couldn\'t save Your own ornaments.\' \'The idea!\' I
said to Mathur. \'Does He who has Lakshmi for His handmaid and attendant
ever lack any splendour? Those jewels may be precious to you, but to God
they are no better than lumps of clay. Shame on you! You shouldn\'t have
spoken so meanly. \'What riches can you give to God to magnify His
glory?\'

\"Therefore I say, a man seeks the person in whom he finds joy. What
need has he to ask where that person lives, the number of his houses,
gardens, relatives, and servants, or the amount of his wealth? I forget
everything when I see Narendra. Never, even unwittingly, have I asked
him where he lived, what his father\'s profession was, or the number of
his brothers.

\"Dive deep in the sweetness of God\'s Bliss. What need have we of His
infinite creation and unlimited glory?\"

The Master sang:

> *Dive deep, O mind, dive deep in the Ocean of God\'s Beauty; If you
> descend to the uttermost depths, There you will find the gem of Love.*
>
> *Go seek, O mind, go seek Vrindāvan in your heart,*
>
> *Where with His loving devotees*
>
> *Sri Krishna sports eternally.*
>
> *Light up, O mind, light up true wisdom\'s shining lamp,*
>
> *And let it burn with steady flame*
>
> *Unceasingly within your heart.*
>
> *Who is it that steers your boat across the solid earth?*
>
> *It is your guru, says Kubir;*
>
> *Meditate on his holy feet.*

Sri Ramakrishna continued: \"It is also true that after the vision of
God the devotee desires to witness His lila. After the destruction of
Ravana at Rama\'s hands, Nikasha, Ravana\'s mother, began to run away
for fear of her life. Lakshmana said to Rama: \'Revered Brother, please
explain this strange thing to me. This Nikasha is an old woman who has
suffered a great deal from the loss of her many sons, and yet she is so
afraid of losing her own life that she is taking to her heels!\' Rama
bade her come near, gave her assurance of safety, and asked her why she
was running away. Nikasha answered: \'O Rama, I am able to witness all
this lila of Yours because I am still alive. I want to live longer so
that I may see the many more things You will do on this earth.\' (All
laugh.)

(To Shivanath) \"I like to see you. How can I live unless I see
pure-souled devotees? I feel as if they had been my friends in a former
incarnation.\"

**Reincarnation of soul & Inscrutability of God\'s ways**

A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"Sir, do you believe in the reincarnation of the
soul?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, they say there is something like that. How can we
understand the ways of God through our small intellects? Many people
have spoken about reincarnation; therefore I cannot disbelieve it. As
Bhishma lay dying on his bed of arrows, the Pandava brothers and Krishna
stood around him. They saw tears flowing from the eyes of the great
hero. Arjuna said to Krishna: \'Friend, how surprising it is! Even such
a man as our grandsire Bhishma-truthful, self-restrained, supremely
wise, and one of the eight Vasus-weeps, through maya, at the hour of
death.\' Sri Krishna asked Bhishma about it. Bhishma replied: \'O
Krishna, You know very well that this is not the cause of my grief. I am
thinking that there is no end to the Pandavas\' sufferings, though God
Himself is their charioteer.7 A thought like this makes me feel that I
have understood nothing of the ways of God, and so I weep.\' \"

It was about half past eight when the evening worship began in the
prayer hall. Soon the moon rose in the autumn sky and flooded the trees
and creepers of the garden with its light. After prayer the devotees
began to sing. Sri Ramakrishna was dancing, intoxicated with love of
God. The Brahmo devotees danced around him to the accompaniment of drums
and cymbals. All appeared to be in a very joyous mood. The place echoed
and re-echoed with God\'s holy name. When the music had stopped, Sri
Ramakrishna prostrated himself on the ground and, making salutations to
the Divine Mother again and again, said: \"Bhagavata-Bhakta-Bhagavan! My
salutations at the feet of the jnanis! My salutations at the feet of the
bhaktas! I salute the bhaktas who believe in God with form, and I salute
the bhaktas who believe in God without form. I salute the knowers of
Brahman of olden times. And my salutations at the feet of the modern
knowers of Brahman of the Brahmo Samaj!\"

Then the Master and the devotees enjoyed a supper of delicious dishes,
which Benimadhav, their host, had provided.

**Wednesday, November 15, 1882**

**Master at the circus**

Sri Ramakrishna, accompanied by Rakhal and several other devotees, came
to Calcutta in a carriage and called for M. at the school where he was
teaching. Then they all set out for the Maidan. Sri Ramakrishna wanted
to see the Wilson Circus. As the carriage rolled along the crowded
Chitpore Road, his joy was very great. Like a little child he leaned
first out of one side of the carriage and then out of the other, talking
to himself as if addressing the passers-by. To M. he said: \"I find the
attention of the people fixed on earthly things. They are all rushing
about for the sake of their stomachs. No one is thinking of God.\"

They arrived at the circus. Tickets for the cheapest seats were
purchased. The devotees took the Master to a high gallery, and they all
sat on a bench. He said joyfully: \"Ha! This is a good place. I can see
the show well from here.\" There were exhibitions of various feats. A
horse raced around a circular track over which large iron rings were
hung at intervals. The circus rider, an Englishwoman, stood on one foot
on the horse\'s back, and as the horse passed under the rings, she
jumped through them, always alighting on one foot on the horse\'s back.
The horse raced around the entire circle, and the woman never missed the
horse or lost her balance.

When the circus was over, the Master and the devotees stood outside in
the field, near the carriage. Since it was a cold night he covered his
body with his green shawl.

**Necessity of spiritual discipline**

Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: \"Did you see how that Englishwoman stood on
one foot on her horse, while it ran like lightning? How difficult a feat
that must be! She must have practised a long time. The slightest
carelessness and she would break her arms or legs; she might even be
killed. One faces the same difficulty leading the life of a householder.
A few succeed in it through the grace of God and as a result of their
spiritual practice. But most people fail. Entering the world, they
become more and more involved in it; they drown in worldliness and
suffer the agonies of death. A few only, like Janaka, have succeeded,
through the power of

their austerity, in leading the spiritual life as householders.
Therefore spiritual practice is extremely necessary; otherwise one
cannot rightly live in the world.\"

The Master got into the carriage with the devotees and went to Balaram
Bose\'s house. He was taken with his companions to the second floor. It
was evening and the lamps were lighted. The Master described the feats
he had seen at the circus. Gradually other devotees gathered, and soon
he was engaged in spiritual talk with them.

**Master on caste-system**

The conversation turned to the caste-system. Sri Ramakrishna said: \"The
caste-system can be removed by one means only, and that is the love of
God. Lovers of God do not belong to any caste. The mind, body, and soul
of a man become purified through divine love. Chaitanya and Nityananda
scattered the name of Hari to everyone, including the pariah, and
embraced them all. A brahmin without this love is no longer a brahmin.
And a pariah with the love of God is no longer a pariah. Through bhakti
an untouchable becomes pure and elevated.\"

**Entanglement of householders**

Speaking of householders entangled in worldliness, the Master said:
\"They are like the silk-worm. They can come out of the cocoon of their
worldly life if they wish. But they can\'t bear to; for they themselves
have built the cocoon with great love and care. So they die there. Or
they are like the fish in a trap. They can come out of it by the way
they entered, but they sport inside the trap with other fish and hear
the sweet sound of the murmuring water and forget everything else. They
don\'t even make an effort to free themselves from the trap. The lisping
of children is the murmur of the water; and the other fish are relatives
and friends. Only one or two make good their escape by running away.
They are the liberated souls.\"

The Master then sang:

> *When such delusion veils the world, through Mahamaya\'s spell,*
>
> *That Brahma is bereft of sense,*
>
> *And Vishnu loses consciousness,*
>
> *What hope is left for men?*
>
> *The narrow channel first is made, and there the trap is set;*
>
> *But open though the passage lies,*
>
> *The fish, once safely through the gate,*
>
> *Do not come out again.*
>
> *The silk-worm patiently prepares its closely spun cocoon;*
>
> *Yet even though a way leads forth,*
>
> *Encased within its own cocoon,*
>
> *The worm remains to die.*

The Master continued: \"Man may be likened to grain. He has fallen
between the millstones and is about to be crushed. Only the few grains
that stay near the peg escape. Therefore men should take refuge at the
peg, that is to say, in God. Call on Him. Sing His name. Then you will
be free. Otherwise you will be crushed by the King of Death.\"

The Master sang again:

> *Mother! Mother! My boat is sinking, here in the ocean of this world;*
>
> *Fiercely the hurricane of delusion rages on every side!*
>
> *Clumsy is my helmsman, the mind; stubborn my six oarsmen, the
> passions;*
>
> *Into a pitiless wind*
>
> *I sailed my boat, and now it is sinking!*
>
> *Split is the rudder of devotion; tattered is the sail of faith;*
>
> *Into my boat the waters are pouring! Tell me, what shall I do?*
>
> *For with my failing eyes, alas! nothing but darkness do I see.*
>
> *Here in the waves I will swim,*
>
> *O Mother, and cling to the raft of Thy name!*

Mr. Viswas had been sitting in the room a long time; he now left. He had
once been wealthy but had squandered everything in an immoral life.
Finally he had become indifferent to his wife and children. Referring to
Mr. Viswas, the Master said: \"He is an unfortunate wretch. A
householder has his duties to discharge, his debts to pay: his debt to
the gods, his debt to his ancestors, his debt to the rishis, and his
debt to wife and children. If a wife is chaste, then her husband should
support her; he should also bring up their children until they are of
age. Only a monk must not save; the bird and the monk do not provide for
the morrow. But even a bird provides when it has young. It brings food
in its bill for its chicks.\"

BALARAM: \"Mr. Viswas now wants to cultivate the company of holy
people.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"A monk\'s kamandalu goes to the four principal
holy places with him, but it still tastes bitter. Likewise, it is said
that the Malaya breeze turns all trees into sandal-wood. But there are a
few exceptions, such as the cotton-tree, the Aśwattha, and the hog plum.

\"Some frequent the company of holy men in order to smoke hemp. Many
monks smoke it, and these householders stay with them, prepare the hemp,
and partake of the prasad.\"

**Thursday, November 16, 1882**

The Master had come to Calcutta. In the evening he went to the house of
Rajmohan, a member of the Brahmo Samaj, where Narendra and some of his
young friends used to meet and worship according to the Brahmo
ceremonies. Sri Ramakrishna wanted to see their worship. He was
accompanied by M. and a few other devotees.

The Master was very happy to see Narendra and expressed a desire to
watch the young men at their worship. Narendra sang and then the worship
began. One of the young men conducted it. He prayed, \"O Lord, may we
give up everything and be absorbed in Thee!\" Possibly the youth was
inspired by the Master\'s presence and so talked of utter renunciation.
Sri Ramakrishna remarked in a whisper, \"Much likelihood there is of
that!\" Rajmohan served the Master with refreshments.

**Sunday, November 19, 1882**

It was the auspicious occasion of the Jagaddhatri Puja, the festival of
the Divine Mother. Sri Ramakrishna was invited to Surendra\'s house in
Calcutta; but first he went to the house of Manomohan in the
neighbourhood.

The Master was seated in Manomohan\'s parlour. He said: \"God very

much relishes the bhakti of the poor and the lowly, just as the cow
relishes fodder mixed with oil-cake. King Duryodhana showed Krishna the
splendour of his wealth and riches, but Krishna accepted the hospitality
of the poor Vidura. God is fond of His devotees. He runs after the
devotee as the cow after the calf.\"

The Master sang:

> *And, for that love, the mighty yogis practise yoga from age to age;*
>
> *When love awakes, the Lord, like a magnet, draws to Him the soul.*

Then he said: \"Chaitanya used to shed tears of joy at the very mention
of Krishna\'s name. God alone is the real Substance; all else is
illusory. Man can realize God if he wants to, but he madly craves the
enjoyment of \'woman and gold\'. The snake has a precious stone in its
head, but it is perfectly satisfied to eat a mere frog.

\"Bhakti is the one essential thing. Who can ever know God through
reasoning? I want love of God. What do I care about knowing His infinite
glories? One bottle of wine makes me drunk. What do I care about knowing
how many gallons there are in the grog-shop? One jar of water is enough
to quench my thirst. I don\'t need to

know the amount of water there is on earth.\"

Sri Ramakrishna arrived at Surendra\'s house. Many devotees had
assembled there, including Surendra\'s elder brother, who was a judge.

**Futility of reasoning**

MASTER (To Surendra\'s brother): \"You are a judge. That is very good.
But remember, everything happens through God\'s power. It is He who has
given you your high position; that is how you became a judge. People
think it is they who are great. The water from the roof flows through a
spout that is shaped like a lion\'s head. It looks as if the lion were
bringing the water out through its mouth. But look at the source of the
water! A cloud gathers in the sky and rain falls on the roof; then the
water flows through the pipe and at last comes out through the spout.\"

SURENDRA\'S BROTHER: \"The Brahmo Samaj preaches the freedom of women
and the abolition of the caste-system. What do you think about these
matters?\"

MASTER: \"Men feel that way when they are just beginning to develop
spiritual yearning. A storm raises clouds of dust, and one cannot
distinguish between the different trees-the mango, the hog plum, and the
tamarind. But after the storm blows over, one sees clearly. After the
first storm of divine passion is quelled, one gradually understands that
God alone is the Highest Good, the Eternal Substance, and that all else
is transitory. One cannot grasp this without tapasya and the company of
holy men. What is the use of merely reciting the written parts for the
drum? It is very difficult to put them into practice on the instrument.
What can be accomplished by a mere lecture? It is austerity that is
necessary. By that alone can one comprehend.

\"You asked about caste distinctions. There is only one way to remove
them, and that is by love of God. Lovers of God have no caste. Through
this divine love the untouchable becomes pure, the pariah no longer
remains a pariah. Chaitanya embraced all, including the pariahs.

\"The members of the Brahmo Samaj sing the name of Hari. That is very
good. Through earnest prayer one receives the grace of God and realizes
Him. God can be realized by means of all paths. The same God is invoked
by different names.\"

**Master on Theosophy**

SURENDRA\'S BROTHER: \"Sir, what do you think of Theosophy?\"

MASTER: \"I have heard that man can acquire superhuman powers through it
and perform miracles. I saw a man who had brought a ghost under control.
The ghost used to procure various things for his master. What shall I do
with superhuman powers? Can one realize God through them? If God is not
realized then everything becomes false.\"

**November 1882**

It was about four o\'clock in the afternoon when Sri Ramakrishna arrived
in Calcutta to attend the annual festival of the Brahmo Samaj, which was
to be celebrated at Manilal Mallick\'s house. Besides M. and other
devotees of the Master, Vijay Goswami and a number of Brahmos were
present. Elaborate arrangements had been made to make the occasion a
success. Vijay was to conduct the worship.

The kathak recited the life of Prahlada from the Purana. Its substance
was as follows: Hiranyakasipu, Prahlada\'s father, was king of the
demons. He bore great malice toward God and put his own son through
endless tortures for leading a religious life. Afflicted by his father,
Prahlada prayed to God, \"O God, please give my father holy
inclinations.\"

At these words the Master wept. He went into an ecstatic mood.
Afterwards he began to talk to the devotees.

MASTER: \"Bhakti is the only essential thing. One obtains love of God by
constantly chanting His name and

singing His glories. Ah! What a devotee Shivanath is! He is soaked in
the love of God, like a cheese-cake in syrup.

\"One should not think, \'My religion alone is the right path and other
religions are false.\' God can be realized by means of all paths. It is
enough to have sincere yearning for God. Infinite are the paths and
infinite the opinions.

**The pure in heart see God**

\"Let me tell you one thing. God can be seen. The Vedas say that God is
beyond mind and speech. The meaning of this is that God is unknown to
the mind attached to worldly objects. Vaishnavcharan used to say, \'God
is known by the mind and intellect that are pure.\' Therefore it is
necessary to seek the company of holy men, practise prayer, and listen
to the instruction of the guru. These purify the mind. Then one sees
God. Dirt can be removed from water by a purifying agent. Then one sees
one\'s reflection in it. One cannot see one\'s face in a mirror if the
mirror is covered with dirt.

\"After the purification of the heart one obtains divine love. Then one
sees God, through His grace. One can teach others if one receives that
command from God after seeing Him. Before that one should not
\'lecture\'. There is a song that says:

> *You have set up no image here,*
>
> *Within the shrine, O fool!*
>
> *Blowing the conch, you simply make*
>
> *Confusion worse confounded.*

\"You should first cleanse the shrine of your heart. Then you should
install the Deity and arrange worship. As yet nothing has been done.
What can you achieve by blowing the conch-shell and simply making a loud
noise? \"

Vijay sat on a raised stool and conducted the worship according to the
rules of the Brahmo Samaj. Afterwards he sat by the Master.

MASTER (to Vijay): \"Will you tell me one thing? Why did you harp so
much on sin? By repeating a hundred times, \'I am a sinner\', one verily
becomes a sinner. One should have such faith as to be able to say,
\'What? I have taken the name of God; how can I be a sinner?\' God is
our Father and Mother. Tell Him, \'O Lord, I have committed sins, but I
won\'t repeat them.\' Chant His name and purify your body and mind.
Purify your tongue by singing God\'s holy name.\"

**December 1882**

In the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was seated on the west porch of his
room in the temple garden at Dakshineswar. Among others, Baburam,
Ramdayal, and M. were present. These three were going to spend the night
with the Master. M. intended to stay the following day also, for he was
having his Christmas holidays. Baburam had only recently begun to visit
the Master.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"A man becomes liberated even in this life
when he knows that God is the Doer of all things. Once Keshab came here
with Sambhu Mallick. I said to him, \'Not even a leaf moves except by
the will of God.\' Where is man\'s free will? All are under the will of
God. Nangta was a man of great knowledge, yet even he was about to drown
himself in the Ganges. He stayed here eleven months. At one time he
suffered from stomach trouble. The excruciating pain made him lose
control over himself, and he wanted to drown himself in the river. There
was a long shoal near the bathing-ghat. However far he went into the
river, he couldn\'t find water above his knees. Then he understood
everything and came back. At one time I was very ill and was about to
cut my throat with a knife. Therefore I say: \'O Mother, I am the
machine and Thou art the Operator; I am the chariot and Thou art the
Driver. I move as Thou movest me; I do as Thou makest me do.\' \"

The devotees sing kirtan in the Master\'s room:

> *Dwell, O Lord, O Lover of bhakti,*
>
> *In the Vrindāvan of my heart,*
>
> *And my devotion unto Thee*
>
> *Will be Thy Radha, dearly loved;*
>
> *My body will be Nanda\'s home,*
>
> *My tenderness will be Yaśoda,*
>
> *My longing for deliverance*
>
> *Will be Thy gentle gopi maids.*
>
> *Lift the Govardhan of my sin*
>
> *And slay my six unyielding passions,*
>
> *Fierce as the demons sent by Kamsa!*
>
> *Sweetly play the flute of Thy grace,*
>
> *Charming the milch cow of my mind;*
>
> *Abide in the pasture of my soul.*
>
> *Dwell by the Jamuna of my yearning,*
>
> *Under the banyan of my hope,*
>
> *For ever gracious to Thy servant;*
>
> *And, if naught but the cowherds\' love*
>
> *Can hold Thee in Vrindāvan\'s vale,*
>
> *Then, Lord, let Dasarathi, too,*
>
> *Become Thy cowherd and Thy slave.*

Again they sang:

> *Sing, O bird that nestles deep within my heart!*
>
> *Sing, O bird that sits on the Kalpa-Tree of Brahman!*
>
> *Sing God\'s everlasting praise.*
>
> *Taste, O bird, of the four fruits of the Kalpa-Tree,*
>
> *Dharma, artha, kama, moksha.*
>
> *Sing, O bird, \"He alone is the Comfort of my soul!\"*
>
> *Sing, O bird, \"He alone is my life\'s enduring Joy!\"*
>
> *O thou wondrous bird of my life,*
>
> *Sing aloud in my heart! Unceasingly sing, O bird!*
>
> *Sing for evermore, even as the thirsty chatak*
>
> *Sings for the raindrop from the cloud.*

A devotee from Nandanbagan entered the room with his friends. The Master
looked at him and said, \"Everything inside him can be seen through his
eyes, as one sees the objects in a room through a glass door.\" This
devotee and his brothers always celebrated the anniversary of the Brahmo
Samaj at their house in Nandanbagan. Sri Ramakrishna had taken part in
these festivals.

The evening worship began in the temples. The Master was seated on the
small couch in his room, absorbed in meditation. He went into an
ecstatic mood and said a little later: \"Mother, please draw him to
Thee. He is so modest and humble! He has been visiting Thee.\" Was the
Master referring to Baburam, who later became one of his foremost
disciples?

**Why so much suffering in God\'s creation?**

The Master explained the different kinds of samādhi to the devotees. The
conversation then turned to the joy and suffering of life. Why did God
create so much suffering?

M: \"Once Vidyasagar said in a mood of pique: \'What is the use of
calling on God? Just think of this incident: At

one time Chenghiz Khan plundered a country and imprisoned many people.
The number of prisoners rose to about a hundred thousand. The commander
of his army said to him: \"Your Majesty, who will feed them? It is risky
to keep them with us. It will be equally dangerous to release them. What
shall I do?\" Chenghiz Khan said: \"That\'s true. What can be done?
Well, have them killed.\" The order was accordingly given to cut them to
pieces. Now, God saw this slaughter, didn\'t He? But He didn\'t stop it
in any way. Therefore I don\'t need God, whether He exists or not. I
don\'t derive any good from Him.\'\"

MASTER: \"Is it possible to understand God\'s action and His motive? He
creates, He preserves, and He destroys. Can we ever understand why He
destroys? I say to the Divine Mother: \'O Mother, I do not need to
understand. Please give me love for Thy Lotus Feet.\' The aim of human
life is to attain bhakti. As for other things, the Mother knows best. I
have come to the garden to eat mangoes. What is the use of my
calculating the number of trees, branches, and leaves? I only eat the
mangoes; I don\'t need to know the number of trees and leaves.\"

Baburam, M., and Ramdayal slept that night on the floor of the Master\'s
room.

It was an early hour of the morning, about two or three o\'clock. The
room was dark. Sri Ramakrishna was seated on his bed and now and then
conversed with the devotees.

**Compassion and attachment**

MASTER: \"Remember that daya, compassion, and maya, attachment, are two
different things. Attachment means the feeling of \'my-ness\' toward
one\'s relatives. It is the love one feels for one\'s parents, one\'s
brother, one\'s sister, one\'s wife and children. Compassion is the love
one feels for all beings of the world. It is an attitude of equality. If
you see anywhere an instance of compassion, as in Vidyasagar, know that
it is due to the grace of God. Through compassion one serves all beings.
Maya also comes from God. Through maya God makes one serve one\'s
relatives. But one thing should be remembered: maya keeps us in
ignorance and entangles us in the world, whereas daya makes our hearts
pure and gradually unties our bonds.

\"God cannot be realized without purity of heart. One receives the grace
of God by subduing the passions-lust, anger, and greed. Then one sees
God. I tried many things in order to conquer lust.

\"When I was ten or eleven years old and lived at Kamarpukur, I first
experienced samādhi. As I was passing through a paddy-field, I saw
something and was overwhelmed. There are certain characteristics of
God-vision. One sees light, feels joy, and experiences the upsurge of a
great current in one\'s chest, like the bursting of a rocket.\"

The next day Baburam and Ramdayal returned to Calcutta. M. spent the day
and the night with the Master.

**December 1882**

It was afternoon. The Master was sitting in his room at Dakshineswar
with M. and one or two other devotees. Several Marwari devotees arrived
and saluted the Master. They requested Sri Ramakrishna to give them
spiritual instruction. He smiled.

MASTER (to the Marwari devotees): \"You see, the feeling of \'I\' and
\'mine\' is the result of ignorance. But to say, \'O God, Thou art the
Doer; all these belong to Thee\' is the sign of Knowledge. How can you
say such a thing as \'mine\'? The superintendent of the garden says,
\'This is my garden.\' But if he is dismissed because of some
misconduct, then he does not have the courage to take away even such a
worthless thing as his mango-wood box. Anger and lust cannot be
destroyed. Turn them toward God. If you must feel desire and temptation,
then desire to realize God, feel tempted by Him. Discriminate and turn
the passions away from worldly objects. When the elephant is about to
devour a plaintain-tree in someone\'s garden, the mahut strikes it with
his iron-tipped goad.

\"You are merchants. You know how to improve your business gradually.
Some of you start with a castor-oil factory. After making some money at
that, you open a cloth shop. In the same way, one makes progress

toward God. It may be that you go into solitude, now and then, and
devote more time to prayer.

\"But you must remember that nothing can be achieved except in its
proper time. Some persons must pass through many experiences and perform
many worldly duties before they can turn their attention to God; so they
have to wait a long time. If an abscess is lanced before it is soft, the
result is not good; the surgeon makes the opening when it is soft and
has come to a head. Once a child said to its mother: \'Mother, I am
going to sleep now. Please wake me up when I feel the call of nature.\'
\'My child,\' said the mother, \'when it is time for that, you will wake
up yourself. I shan\'t have to wake you.\' \"

The Marwari devotees generally brought offerings of fruit, candy, and
other sweets for the Master. But Sri Ramakrishna could hardly eat them.
He would say: \"They earn their money by falsehood. I can\'t eat their
offerings.\" He said to the Marwaris: \"You see, one can\'t strictly
adhere to truth in business. There are ups and downs in business. Nanak
once said, \'I was about to eat the food of unholy people, when I found
it stained with blood.\' A man should offer only pure things to holy
men. He shouldn\'t give them food earned by dishonest means. God is
realized by following the path of truth. One should always chant His
name. Even while one is performing one\'s duties, the mind should be
left with God. Suppose I have a carbuncle on my back. I perform my
duties, but the mind is drawn to the carbuncle. It is good to repeat the
name of Rama. \'The same Rama who was the son of King Dasaratha has
created this world. Again, as Spirit, He pervades all beings. He is very
near us; He is both within and without.\' \"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 7**

THE MASTER AND VIJAY GOSWAMI

> Thursday, December 14, 1882

IT WAS AFTERNOON. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on his bed after a short
noonday rest. Vijay, Balaram, M., and a few other devotees were sitting
on the floor with their faces toward the Master. They could see the
sacred river Ganges through the door. Since it was winter all were
wrapped up in warm clothes. Vijay had been suffering from colic and had
brought some medicine with him.

**Vijay, the Brahmo preacher**

Vijay was a paid preacher in the Sadharan Brahmo Samaj, but there were
many things about which he could not agree with the Samaj authorities.
He came from a very noble family of Bengal noted for its piety and other
spiritual qualities. Advaita Goswami, one of his remote ancestors, had
been an intimate companion of Sri Chaitanya. Thus the blood of a great
lover of God flowed in Vijay\'s veins. As an adherent of the Brahmo
Samaj, Vijay no doubt meditated on the formless Brahman; but his innate
love of God, inherited from his distinguished ancestors, had merely been
waiting for the proper time to manifest itself in all its sweetness.
Thus Vijay was irresistibly attracted by the God-intoxicated state of
Sri Ramakrishna and often sought his company. He would listen to the
Master\'s words with great respect, and they would dance together in an
ecstasy of divine love.

It was a week-day. Generally devotees came to the Master in large
numbers on Sundays; hence those who wanted to have intimate talks with
him visited him on week-days.

**Tendencies from previous births**

A boy named Vishnu, living in Ariadaha, had recently committed suicide
by cutting his throat with a razor. The talk turned to him.

MASTER: \"I felt very badly when I heard of the boy\'s passing away. He
was a pupil in a school and he used to come here. He would often say to
me that he couldn\'t enjoy worldly life. He had lived with some
relatives in the western provinces and at that time used to meditate in
solitude, in the meadows, hills, and forests. He told me he had visions
of many divine forms.

\"Perhaps this was his last birth. He must have finished most of his
duties in his previous birth. The little that had been left undone was
perhaps finished in this one.

\"One must admit the existence of tendencies inherited from previous
births. There is a story about a man who practised the sava-sadhana.l He
worshipped the Divine Mother in a deep forest. First he saw many
terrible visions. Finally a tiger attacked and killed him. Another man,
happening to pass and seeing the approach of the tiger, had climbed a
tree. Afterwards he got down and found all the arrangements for worship
at hand. He performed some purifying ceremonies and seated himself on
the corpse. No sooner had he done a little japa than the Divine Mother
appeared before him and said: \'My child, I am very much pleased with
you. Accept a boon from Me.\' He bowed low at the Lotus Feet of the
Goddess and said: \'May I ask You one question, Mother? I am speechless
with amazement at Your action. The other man worked so hard to get the
ingredients for Your worship and tried to propitiate You for such a long
time, but You didn\'t condescend to show him Your favour. And I, who
don\'t know anything of worship, who have done nothing, who have neither
devotion nor knowledge nor love, and who haven\'t practised any
austerities, am receiving so much of Your grace.\' The Divine Mother
said with a laugh: \'My child, you don\'t remember your previous births.
For many births you tried to propitiate Me through austerities. As a
result of those austerities all these things have come to hand, and you
have been blessed with My Vision. Now ask Me your boon.\' \"

**Suicide after the vision of God**

A DEVOTEE: \"I am frightened to hear of the suicide.\"

MASTER: \"Suicide is a heinous sin, undoubtedly. A man who kills himself
must return again and again to this world and suffer its agony.

\"But I don\'t call it suicide if a person leaves his body after having
the vision of God. There is no harm in giving up one\'s body that way.
After attaining Knowledge some people give up their bodies. After the
gold image has been cast in the clay mould, you may either preserve the
mould or break it.

\"Many years ago a young man of about twenty used to come to the temple
garden from Baranagore; his name was Gopal Sen. In my presence he used
to experience such intense ecstasy that Hriday had to support him for
fear he might fall to the ground and break his limbs. That young man
touched my feet one day and said: \'Sir, I shall not be able to see you
any more. Let me bid you good-bye.\' A few days later I learnt that he
had given up his body.

**Four classes of men**

\"It is said that there are four classes of human beings: the bound,
those aspiring after liberation, the liberated, and the ever-perfect.

**Parable of the fish and the net**

\"This world is like a fishing-net. Men are the fish, and God, whose
maya has created this world, is the fisherman. When the fish are
entangled in the net, some of them try to tear through its meshes in
order to get their liberation. They are like the men striving after
liberation. But by no means all of them escape. Only a few jump out of
the net with a loud splash, and then people say, \'Ah! There goes a big
one!\' In like manner, three or four men attain liberation. Again, some
fish are so careful by nature that they are never caught in the net;
some beings of the ever-perfect class, like Narada, are never entangled
in the meshes of worldliness. Most of the fish are trapped; but they are
not conscious of the net and of their imminent death. No sooner are they
entangled than they run headlong, net and all, trying to hide themselves
in the mud. They don\'t make the least effort to get free. On the
contrary, they go deeper and deeper into the mud. These fish are like
the bound men. They are still inside the net, but they think they are
quite safe there. A bound creature is immersed in worldliness, in
\'woman and gold\', having gone deep into the mire of degradation. But
still he believes he is quite happy and secure. The liberated, and the
seekers after liberation, look on the world as a deep well. They do not
enjoy it. Therefore, after the attainment of Knowledge, the realization
of God, some give up their bodies. But such a thing is rare indeed.

**Worldly-minded forget their lessons**

\"The bound creatures, entangled in worldliness, will not come to their
senses at all. They suffer so much misery and agony, they face so many
dangers, and yet they will not wake up.

\"The camel loves to eat thorny bushes. The more it eats the thorns, the
more the blood gushes from its mouth. Still it must eat thorny plants
and will never give them up. The man of worldly nature suffers so much
sorrow and affliction, but he forgets it all in a few days and begins
his old life over again. Suppose a man has lost his wife or she has
turned unfaithful. Lo! He marries again.

\"Or take the instance of a mother: her son dies and she suffers bitter
grief; but after a few days she forgets all about it. The mother, so
overwhelmed with sorrow a few days before, now attends to her toilet and
puts on her jewelry. A father becomes bankrupt through the marriage of
his daughters, yet he goes on having children year after year. People
are ruined by litigation, yet they go to court all the same. There are
men who cannot feed the children they have, who cannot clothe them or
provide decent shelter for them; yet they have more children every year.

\"Again, the worldly man is like a snake trying to swallow a mole. The
snake can neither swallow the mole nor

give it up. The bound soul may have realized that there is no substance
to the world-that the world is like a hog plum, only stone and skin-but
still he cannot give it up and turn his mind to God.

\"I once met a relative of Keshab Sen, fifty years old. He was playing
cards. As if the time had not yet come for him to think of God!

\"There is another characteristic of the bound soul. If you remove him
from his worldly surroundings to a spiritual environment, he will pine
away. The worm that grows in filth feels very happy there. It thrives in
filth. It will die if you put it in a pot of rice.\"

All remained silent.

**Bondage removed by strong renunciation**

VIJAY: \"What must the bound soul\'s condition of mind be in order to
achieve liberation?\"

MASTER: \"He can free himself from attachment to \'woman and gold\' if,
by the grace of God, he cultivates a spirit of strong renunciation. What
is this strong renunciation? One who has only a mild spirit of
renunciation says, \'Well, all will happen in the course of time; let me
now simply repeat the name of God.\' But a man possessed of a strong
spirit of renunciation feels restless for God, as the mother feels for
her own child. A man of strong renunciation seeks nothing but God. He
regards the world as a deep well and feels as if he were going to be
drowned in it. He looks on his relatives as venomous snakes; he wants to
fly away from them. And he does go away. He never thinks, \'Let me first
make some arrangement for my family and then I shall think of God.\' He
has great inward resolution.

**Parable of the two farmers**

\"Let me tell you a story about strong renunciation. At one time there
was a drought in a certain part of the country. The farmers began to cut
long channels to bring water to their fields. One farmer was stubbornly
determined. He took a vow that he would not stop digging until the
channel connected his field with the river. He set to work. The time
came for his bath, and his wife sent their daughter to him with oil.
\'Father,\' said the girl, \'it is already late. Rub your body with oil
and take your bath.\' \'Go away!\' thundered the farmer. \'I have too
much to do now.\' It was past midday, and the farmer was still at work
in his field. He didn\'t even think of his bath. Then his wife came and
said: \'Why haven\'t you taken your bath? The food is getting cold. You
overdo everything. You can finish the rest tomorrow or even today after
dinner.\' The farmer scolded her furiously and ran at her, spade in
hand, crying: \'What? Have you no sense? There\'s no rain. The crops are
dying. What will the children eat? You\'ll all starve to death. I have
taken a vow not to think of bath and food today before I bring water to
my field.\' The wife saw his state of mind and ran away in fear. Through
a whole day\'s back-breaking labour the farmer managed by evening to
connect his field with the river. Then he sat down and watched the water
flowing into his field with a murmuring sound. His mind was filled with
peace and joy. He went home, called his wife, and said to her, \'Now
give me some oil and prepare me a smoke.\' With serene mind he finished
his bath and meal, and retired to bed, where he snored to his heart\'s
content. The determination he showed is an example of strong
renunciation.

\"Now, there was another farmer who was also digging a channel to bring
water to his field. His wife, too, came to the field and said to him:
\'It\'s very late. Come home. It isn\'t necessary to overdo things.\'
The farmer didn\'t protest much, but put aside his spade and said to his
wife, \'Well, I\'ll go home since you ask me to.\' (All laugh) That man
never succeeded in irrigating his field. This is a case of mild
renunciation.

\"As without strong determination the farmer cannot bring water to his
field, so also without intense yearning a man cannot realize God. (To
Vijay) Why don\'t you come here now as frequently as before?\"

VIJAY: \"Sir, I wish to very much, but I am not free. I have accepted
work in the Brahmo Samaj.\"

**Attachment to \"woman\" creates bondage**

MASTER: \"It is \'woman and gold\' that binds man and robs him of his
freedom. It is woman that creates the

need for gold. For woman one man becomes the slave of another, and so
loses his freedom. Then he cannot act as he likes.

**Story of Govindaji\'s priests**

\"The priests in the temple of Govindaji at Jaipur were celibates at
first, and at that time they had fiery natures. Once the King of Jaipur
sent for them, but they didn\'t obey him. They said to the messenger,
\'Ask the king to come to see us.\' After consultation, the king and his
ministers arranged marriages for them. From then on the king didn\'t
have to send for them. They would come to him of themselves and say:
\'Your Majesty, we have come with our blessings. Here are the sacred
flowers of the temple. Deign to accept them.\' They came to the palace,
for now they always wanted money for one thing or another: the building
of a house, the rice-taking ceremony of their babies, or the rituals
connected with the beginning of their children\'s education.

**Story of twelve hundred nedas**

\"There is the story of the twelve hundred nedas and thirteen hundred
nedis. Virabhadra, the son of Nityananda Goswami, had thirteen hundred
\'shaven-headed\' disciples. They attained great spiritual powers. That
alarmed their teacher. \'My disciples have acquired great spiritual
powers\', thought Virabhadra. \'Whatever they say to people will come to
pass. Wherever they go they may create alarming situations; for people
offending them unwittingly will come to grief.\' Thinking thus,
Virabhadra one day called them to him and said, \'See me after
performing your daily devotions on the bank of the Ganges.\' These
disciples had such a high spiritual nature that, while meditating, they
would go into samādhi and be unaware of the river water flowing over
their heads during the flood-tide. Then the ebb-tide would come and
still they would remain absorbed in meditation.

\"Now, one hundred of these disciples had anticipated what their teacher
would ask of them. Lest they should have to disobey his injunctions,
they had quickly disappeared from the place before he summoned them. So
they did not go to Virabhadra with the others. The remaining twelve
hundred disciples went to the teacher after finishing their meditation.
Virabhadra said to them: \'These thirteen hundred nuns will serve you. I
ask you to marry them.\' \'As you please, revered sir\', they said.
\'But one hundred of us have gone away.\' Thenceforth each of these
twelve hundred disciples had a wife. Consequently they all lost their
spiritual power. Their austerities did not have their original fire. The
company of woman robbed them of their spirituality because it destroyed
their freedom.

**Degrading effect of serving others**

(To Vijay) \"You yourself perceive how far you have gone down by being a
servant of others. Again, one finds that people with many university
degrees, scholars with their vast English education, accept service
under their English masters and are daily trampled under their boots.
The one cause of all this is woman. They have married and set up a \'gay
fair\' with their wives and children. Now they cannot go back, much as
they would like to. Hence all these insults and humiliations, all this
suffering from slavery.

\"Once a man realizes God through intense dispassion, he is no longer
attached to woman. Even if he must lead the life of a householder, he is
free from fear of and attachment to woman. Suppose there are two
magnets, one big and the other small. Which one will attract the iron?
The big one, of course. God is the big magnet. Compared to Him, woman is
a small one. What can \'woman\' do?\"

**Worshipping woman as Divine Mother**

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, shall we hate women then?\"

MASTER: \"He who has realized God does not look upon a woman with the
eye of lust; so he is not afraid of her. He perceives clearly that women
are but so many aspects of the Divine Mother. He worships them all as
the Mother Herself.

(To Vijay) \"Come here now and then. I like to see you very much.\"

VIJAY: \"I have to do my various duties in the Brahmo Samaj; that is why
I can\'t always come here. But I shall visit you whenever I find it
possible.\"

**Difficulties of preaching**

MASTER (to Vijay): \"The task of a religious teacher is indeed
difficult. One cannot teach men without a direct command from God.
People won\'t listen to you if you teach without such authority. Such
teaching has no force behind it. One must first of all attain God
through spiritual discipline or some other means. Thus armed with
authority from God, one can deliver lectures.

\"After receiving the command from God, one can be a teacher and give
lectures anywhere. He who receives authority from God also receives
power from Him. Only then can he perform the difficult task of a
teacher.

\"An insignificant tenant was once engaged in a lawsuit with a big
landlord. People realized that there was a powerful man behind the
tenant. Perhaps another big landlord was directing the case from behind.
Man is an insignificant creature. He cannot fulfil the difficult task of
a teacher without receiving power direct from God.\"

VIJAY: \"Don\'t the teachings of the Brahmo Samaj bring men salvation?\"

MASTER: \"How is it ever possible for one man to liberate another from
the bondage of the world? God alone, the Creator of this
world-bewitching maya, can save men from maya. There is no other refuge
but that great Teacher, Satchidananda. How is it ever possible for men
who have not realized God or received His command, and who are not
strengthened with divine strength, to save others from the prison-house
of the world?

\"One day as I was passing the Panchavati on my way to the pine-grove, I
heard a bullfrog croaking. I thought it must have been seized by a
snake. After some time, as I was coming back, I could still hear its
terrified croaking. I looked to see what was the matter, and found that
a water-snake had seized it. The snake could neither swallow it nor give
it up. So there was no end to the frog\'s suffering. I thought that had
it been seized by a cobra it would have been silenced after three croaks
at the most. As it was only a water-snake, both of them had to go
through this agony. A man\'s ego is destroyed after three croaks, as it
were, if he gets into the clutches of a real teacher. But if the teacher
is an \'unripe\' one, then both the teacher and the disciple undergo
endless suffering. The disciple cannot get rid either of his ego or of
the shackles of the world. If a disciple falls into the clutches of an
incompetent teacher, he doesn\'t attain liberation.\"

**Ego alone the cause of bondage**

VIJAY: \"Sir, why are we bound like this? Why don\'t we see God?\"

MASTER : \"Maya is nothing but the egotism of the embodied soul. This
egotism has covered everything like a veil. \'All troubles come to an
end when the ego dies.\' If by the grace of God a man but once realizes
that he is not the doer, then he at once becomes a Jivanmukta. Though
living in the body, he is liberated. He has nothing else to fear.

\"This maya, that is to say, the ego, is like a cloud. The sun cannot be
seen on account of a thin patch of cloud; when that disappears one sees
the sun. If by the grace of the guru one\'s ego vanishes, then one sees
God.

\"Rama, who is God Himself, was only two and a half cubits ahead of
Lakshmana. But Lakshmana couldn\'t see Him because Sita stood between
them. Lakshmana may be compared to the jiva, and Sita to maya. Man
cannot see God on account of the barrier of maya. Just look: I am
creating a barrier in front of my face with this towel. Now you can\'t
see me, even though I am so near. Likewise, God is the nearest of all,
but we cannot see Him on account of this covering of maya.

**Maya creates upadhis**

\"The jiva is nothing but the embodiment of Satchidananda. But since
maya, or ego, has created various

upadhis, he has forgotten his real Self.

\"Each upadhi changes man\'s nature. If he wears a fine black-bordered
cloth, you will at once find him humming Nidhu Babu\'s love-songs. Then
playing-cards and a walking-stick follow. If even a sickly man puts on
high boots, he begins to whistle and climbs the stairs like an
Englishman, jumping from one step to another. If a man but holds a pen
in his hand, he scribbles on any paper he can get hold of-such is the
power of the pen!

\"Money is also a great upadhi. The possession of money makes such a
difference in a man! He is no longer the same person. A brahmin used to
frequent the temple garden. Outwardly he was very modest. One day I went
to Konnagar with Hriday. No sooner did we get off the boat than we
noticed the brahmin seated on the bank of the Ganges. We thought he had
been enjoying the fresh air. Looking at us, he said: \'Hello there,
priest! How do you do?\' I marked his tone and said to Hriday: \'The man
must have got some money. That\'s why he talks that way.\' Hriday
laughed.

\"A frog had a rupee, which he kept in his hole. One day an elephant was
going over the hole, and the frog, coming out in a fit of anger, raised
his foot, as if to kick the elephant, and said, \'How dare you walk over
my head?\' Such is the pride that money begets!

\"One can get rid of the ego after the attainment of Knowledge. On
attaining Knowledge one goes into samādhi, and the ego disappears. But
it is very difficult to obtain such Knowledge.

**Seven planes of the mind**

\"It is said in the Vedas that a man experiences samādhi when his mind
ascends to the seventh plane. The ego can disappear only when one goes
into samādhi. Where does the mind of a man ordinarily dwell? In the
first three planes. These are at the organs of evacuation and
generation, and at the navel. Then the mind is immersed only in
worldliness, attached to \'woman and gold\'. A man sees the light of God
when his mind dwells in the plane of the heart. He sees the light and
exclaims: \'Ah! What is this? What is this?\' The next plane is at the
throat. When the mind dwells there he likes to hear and talk only of
God. When the mind ascends to the next plane, in the forehead, between
the eyebrows, he sees the form of Satchidānanda and desires to touch and
embrace It. But he is unable to do so. It is like the light in a
lantern, which you can see but cannot touch. You feel as if you were
touching the light, but in reality you are not. When the mind reaches
the seventh plane, then the ego vanishes completely and the man goes
into samādhi.\"

**Indescribability of highest plane**

VIJAY: \"What does a man see when he attains the Knowledge of Brahman
after reaching the seventh plane?\"

MASTER: \"What happens when the mind reaches the seventh plane cannot be
described.

\"Once a boat enters the \'black waters\' of the ocean, it does not
return. Nobody knows what happens to the boat after that. Therefore the
boat cannot give us any information about the ocean.

\"Once a salt doll went to measure the depth of the ocean. No sooner did
it enter the water than it melted. Now who could tell how deep the ocean
was? That which could have told about its depth had melted. Reaching the
seventh plane, the mind is annihilated; man goes into samādhi. What he
feels then cannot be described in words.

**The \"wicked I\"**

\"The \'I\' that makes one a worldly person and attaches one to \'woman
and gold\' is the \'wicked I\'. The intervention of this ego creates the
difference between jiva and Ātman. Water appears to be divided into two
parts if one puts a stick across it. But in reality there is only one
water. It appears as two on account of the stick. This \'I\' is the
stick. Remove the stick and there remains only one water as before.

\"Now, what is this \'wicked I\'? It is the ego that says: \'What?
Don\'t they know me? I have so much money!

Who is wealthier than I?\' If a thief robs such a man of only ten
rupees, first of all he wrings the money out of the thief, then he gives
him a good beating. But the matter doesn\'t end there: the thief is
handed over to the police and is eventually sent to jail. The \'wicked
I\' says: \'What? Doesn\'t the rogue know whom he has robbed? To steal
my ten rupees! How dare he?\' \"

VIJAY: \"If without destroying the \'I\' a man cannot get rid of
attachment to the world and consequently cannot experience samādhi, then
it would be wise for him to follow the path of Brahmajnāna to attain
samādhi. If the \'I\' persists in the path of devotion, then one should
rather choose the path of knowledge.\"

**The \"servant I\"**

MASTER: \"It is true that one or two can get rid of the \'I\' through
samādhi; but these cases are very rare. You may indulge in thousands of
reasonings, but still the \'I\' comes back. You may cut the peepal-tree
to the very root today, but you will notice a sprout springing up
tomorrow. Therefore if the \'I\' must remain, let the rascal remain as
the \'servant I\'. As long as you live, you should say, \'O God, Thou
art the Master and I am Thy servant.\' The \'I\' that feels, \'I am the
servant of God, I am His devotee\' does not injure one. Sweet things
cause acidity of the stomach, no doubt, but sugar candy is an exception.

\"The path of knowledge is very difficult. One cannot obtain Knowledge
unless one gets rid of the feeling that one is the body. In the Kaliyuga
the life of man is centred on food. He cannot get rid of the feeling
that he is the body and the ego. Therefore the path of devotion is
prescribed for this cycle.

This is an easy path. You will attain God if you sing His name and
glories and pray to Him with a longing heart. There is not the least
doubt about it.

\"Suppose you draw a line on the surface of water with a bamboo stick.
The water appears to be divided into two parts; but the line doesn\'t
remain for any length of time. The \'servant I\'or the \'devotee I\' or
the \'child I\' is only a line drawn with the ego and is not real\".

**The \"ego of a devotee\"**

VIJAY (to the Master): \"Sir, you ask us to renounce the \'wicked I\'.
Is there any harm in the \'servant I\'?\"

MASTER: \"The \'servant I\'-that is, the feeling, \'I am the servant of
God, I am the devotee of God\'-does not injure one. On the contrary, it
helps one to realize God.\"

VIJAY: \"Well, sir, what becomes of the lust, anger, and other passions
of one who keeps the \'servant I\'?\"

MASTER: \"If a man truly feels like that, then he has only the semblance
of lust, anger, and the like. If, after attaining God, he looks on
himself as the servant or the devotee of God, then he cannot injure
anyone. By touching the philosopher\'s stone a sword is turned into
gold. It keeps the appearance of a sword but cannot injure.

\"When the dry branch of a coconut palm drops to the ground, it leaves
only a mark on the trunk indicating that once there was a branch at that
place. In like manner, he who has attained God keeps only an appearance
of ego; there remains in him only a semblance of anger and lust. He
becomes like a child. A child has no attachment to the three
gunas-sattva, rajas, and tamas. He becomes as quickly detached from a
thing as he becomes attached to it. You can cajole him out of a cloth
worth five rupees with a doll worth an *ānnā*, though at first he may
say with great determination: \'No, I won\'t give it to you. My daddy
bought it for me.\' Again, all persons are the same to a child. He has
no feeling of high and low in regard to persons. So he doesn\'t
discriminate about caste. If his mother tells him that a particular man
should be regarded as an elder brother, the child will eat from the same
plate with him, though the man may belong to the low caste of a
blacksmith. The child doesn\'t know hate, or what is holy or unholy.

\"Even after attaining samādhi, some retain the \'servant ego\' or the
\'devotee ego\'. The bhakta keeps this \'I-consciousness\'. He says, \'O
God, Thou art the Master and I am Thy servant; Thou art the Lord and I
am Thy devotee.\' He feels that way even after the realization of God.
His \'I\' is not completely effaced. Again, by

constantly practising this kind of \'I-consciousness\', one ultimately
attains God. This is called bhaktiyoga.

\"One can attain the Knowledge of Brahman, too, by following the path of
bhakti. God is all-powerful. He may give His devotee Brahmajnāna also,
if He so wills. But the devotee generally doesn\'t seek the Knowledge of
the Absolute. He would rather have the consciousness that God is the
Master and he the servant, or that God is the Divine Mother and he the
child.\"

VIJAY: \"But those who discriminate according to the Vedanta philosophy
also realize Him in the end, don\'t they?\"

**Path of bhakti is easy**

MASTER: \"Yes, one may reach Him by following the path of discrimination
too: that is called Jnanayoga. But it is an extremely difficult path. I
have told you already of the seven planes of consciousness. On reaching
the seventh plane the mind goes into samādhi. If a man acquires the firm
knowledge that Brahman alone is real and the world illusory, then his
mind merges in samādhi. But in the Kaliyuga the life of a man depends
entirely on food. How can he have the consciousness that Brahman alone
is real and the world illusory? In the Kaliyuga it is difficult to have
the feeling, \'I am not the body, I am not the mind, I am not the
twenty-four cosmic principles; I am beyond pleasure and pain, I am above
disease and grief, old age and death.\' However you may reason and
argue, the feeling that the body is identical with the soul will somehow
crop up from an unexpected quarter. You may cut a peepal-tree to the
ground and think it is dead to its very root, but the next morning you
will find a new sprout shooting up from the dead stump. One cannot get
rid of this identification with the body; therefore the path of bhakti
is best for the people of the Kaliyuga. It is an easy path.

\"And, \'I don\'t want to become sugar; I want to eat it.\' I never feel
like saying, \'I am Brahman.\' I say, \'Thou art my Lord and I am Thy
servant.\' It is better to make the mind go up and down between the
fifth and sixth planes, like a boat racing between two points. I don\'t
want to go beyond the sixth plane and keep my mind a long time in the
seventh. My desire is to sing the name and glories of God. It is very
good to look on God as the Master and oneself as His servant. Further,
you see, people speak of the waves as belonging to the Ganges; but no
one says that the Ganges belongs to the waves. The feeling, \'I am He\',
is not wholesome. A man who entertains such an idea, while looking on
his body as the Self, causes himself great harm. He cannot go forward in
spiritual life; he drags himself down. He deceives himself as well as
others. He cannot understand his own state of mind.

**Prema-bhakti**

\"But it isn\'t any and every kind of bhakti that enables one to realize
God. One cannot realize God without prema-bhakti. Another name for
prema-bhakti is raga-bhakti. God cannot be realized without love and
longing. Unless one has learnt to love God, one cannot realize Him.

\"There is another kind of bhakti, known as vaidhi-bhakti, according to
which one must repeat the name of God a fixed number of times, fast,
make pilgrimages, worship God with prescribed offerings, make so many
sacrifices, and so forth and so on. By continuing such practices a long
time one gradually acquires raga-bhakti. God cannot be realized until
one has raga-bhakti. One must love God. In order to realize God one must
be completely free from worldliness and direct all of one\'s mind to
Him.

\"But some acquire raga-bhakti directly. It is innate in them. They have
it from their very childhood. Even at an early age they weep for God. An
instance of such bhakti is to be found in Prahlada. Vaidhi-bhakti is
like moving a fan to make a breeze. One needs the fan to make the
breeze. Similarly, one practises japa, austerity, and fasting, in order
to acquire love of God. But the fan is set aside when the southern
breeze blows of itself.

Such actions as japa and austerity drop away when one spontaneously
feels love and attachment for God. Who, indeed, will perform the
ceremonies enjoined in the scriptures, when mad with love of God?

\"Devotion to God may be said to be \'green\' so long as it doesn\'t
grow into love of God; but it becomes \'ripe\' when it has grown into
such love.

\"A man with \'green\' bhakti cannot assimilate spiritual talk and
instruction; but one with \'ripe\' bhakti can. The image that falls on a
photographic plate covered with black film5 is retained. On the other
hand, thousands of images may be reflected on a bare piece of glass, but
not one of them is retained. As the object moves away, the glass becomes
the same as it was before. One cannot assimilate spiritual instruction
unless one has already developed love of God.\"

VIJAY: \"Is bhakti alone sufficient for the attainment of God, for His
vision?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, one can see God through bhakti alone. But it must be
\'ripe\' bhakti, prema-bhakti and raga-bhakti. When one has that bhakti,
one loves God even as the mother loves the child, the child the mother,
or the wife the husband.

\"When one has such love and attachment for God, one doesn\'t feel the
attraction of maya to wife, children, relatives, and friends. One
retains only compassion for them. To such a man the world appears a
strange land, a place where he has merely to perform his duties. It is
like a man\'s having his real home in the country, but coming to
Calcutta for work; he has to rent a house in Calcutta for the sake of
his duties. When one develops love of God, one completely gets rid of
one\'s attachment to the world and worldly wisdom.

\"One cannot see God if one has even the slightest trace of worldliness.
Match-sticks, if damp, won\'t strike fire though you rub a thousand of
them against the match-box. You only waste a heap of sticks. The mind
soaked in worldliness is such a damp match-stick. Once Sri Radha said to
her friends that she saw Krishna everywhere-both within and without. The
friends answered: \'Why, we don\'t see Him at all. Are you delirious?\'
Radha said, \'Friends, paint your eyes with the collyrium of divine
love, and then you will see Him.\'

(To Vijay) \"It is said in a song of your Brahmo Samaj:

> *O Lord, is it ever possible to know Thee without love,*
>
> *However much one may perform worship and sacrifice?*

\"If the devotee but once feels this attachment and ecstatic love for
God, this mature devotion and longing, then he sees God in both His
aspects, with form and without form.\"

**Purity of heart**

VIJAY: \"How can one see God?\"

MASTER: \"One cannot see God without purity of heart. Through attachment
to \'woman and gold\' the mind has become stained-covered with dirt, as
it were. A magnet cannot attract a needle if the needle is covered with
mud. Wash away the mud and the magnet will draw it. Likewise, the dirt
of the mind can be washed away with the tears of our eyes. This stain is
removed if one sheds tears of repentance and says, \'O God, I shall
never again do such a thing.\' Thereupon God, who is like the magnet,
draws to Himself the mind, which is like the needle. Then the devotee
goes into samādhi and obtains the vision of God.

**God\'s grace is the ultimate help**

\"You may try thousands of times, but nothing can be achieved without
God\'s grace. One cannot see God without His grace. Is it an easy thing
to receive the grace of God? One must altogether renounce egotism; one
cannot see God as long as one feels, \'I am the doer.\' Suppose, in a
family, a man has taken charge of the store-room; then if someone asks
the master, \'Sir, will you yourself kindly give me something from the
store-room?\', the master says to him: \'There is already someone in the
store-room. What can I do there?\'

\"God doesn\'t easily appear in the heart of a man who feels himself to
be his own master. But God can be seen the moment His grace descends. He
is the Sun of Knowledge. One single ray of His has illumined the world
with the light of knowledge. That is how we are able to see one another
and acquire varied knowledge.

One can see God only if He turns His light toward His own face.

\"The police sergeant goes his rounds in the dark of night with a
lantern6 in his hand. No one sees his face; but with the help of that
light the sergeant sees everybody\'s face, and others, too, can see one
another. If you want to see the sergeant, however, you must pray to him:
\'Sir, please turn the light on your own face. Let me see you.\' In the
same way one must pray to God: \'O Lord, be gracious and turn the light
of knowledge on Thyself, that I may see Thy face.\'

\"A house without light indicates poverty. So one must light the lamp of
Knowledge in one\'s heart. As it is said in a song:

> *Lighting the lamp of Knowledge in the chamber of your heart, Behold
> the face of the Mother, Brahman\'s Embodiment.\"*

As Vijay had brought medicine with him, the Master asked a devotee to
give him some water. He was indeed a fountain of infinite compassion. He
had arranged for Vijay\'s boat fare, since the latter was too poor to
pay it. Vijay, Balaram, M., and the other devotees left for Calcutta in
a country boat.

**Monday, January 1, 1883**

At eight o\'clock in the morning Sri Ramakrishna was seated on a mat
spread on the floor of his room at Dakshineswar. Since it was a cold
day, he had wrapped his body in his moleskin shawl. Prankrishna and M.
were seated in front of him. Rakhal, too, was in the room. Prankrishna
was a high government official and lived in Calcutta. Since he had had
no offspring by his first wife, with her permission he had married a
second time. By the second wife he had a son. Because he was rather
stout, the Master addressed him now and then as \"the fat brahmin\". He
had great respect for Sri Ramakrishna. Though a householder, Prankrishna
studied the Vedanta and had been heard to say: \"Brahman alone is real
and the world illusory. I am He.\" The Master used to say to him: \"In
the Kaliyuga the life of a man depends on food. The path of devotion
prescribed by Narada is best for this age.\"

A devotee had brought a basket of jilipi for the Master, which the
latter kept by his side. Eating a bit of the sweets, he said to
Prankrishna with a smile: \"You see, I chant the name of the Divine
Mother; so I get all these good things to eat. (Laughter.) But She
doesn\'t give such fruits as gourd or pumpkin. She bestows the fruit of
Amrita, Immortality-knowledge, love, discrimination, renunciation, and
so forth.\"

A boy six or seven years old entered the room. The Master himself became
like a child. He covered the contents of the basket with the palm or his
hand, as a child does to conceal sweets from another child lest the
latter should snatch them. Then he put the basket aside.

Suddenly the Master went into samādhi and sat thus a long time. His body
was transfixed, his eyes wide open and unwinking, his breathing hardly
perceptible. After a long time he drew a deep breath, indicating his
return to the world of sense.

**Vision of Divine Mother**

MASTER (to Prankrishna): \"My Divine Mother is not only formless, She
has forms as well. One can see Her forms. One can behold Her
incomparable beauty through feeling and love. The Mother reveals Herself
to Her devotees in different forms.

\"I saw Her yesterday. She was clad in a seamless ochre-coloured
garment, and She talked with me.

\"She came to me another day as a Mussalman girl six or seven years old.
She had a tilak on her forehead and was naked. She walked with me,
joking and frisking like a child.

\"At Hriday\'s house I had a vision of Gauranga. He wore a
black-bordered cloth.

\"Haladhāri used to say that God is beyond both Being and Non-being. I
told the Mother about it and asked

Her, \'Then is the divine form an illusion?\' The Divine Mother appeared
to me in the form of Rati\'s mother and said, \'Do thou remain in
***Bhāva*\'** I repeated this to Haladhāri. Now and then I forget Her
command and suffer. Once I broke my teeth because I didn\'t remain in
bhava. So I shall remain in bhava unless I receive a revelation from
heaven or have a direct experience to the contrary. I shall follow the
path of love. What do you say?\"

PRANKRISHNA: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"But why should I ask you about it? There is Someone within me
who does all these things through me. At times I used to remain in a
mood of Godhood and would enjoy no peace of mind unless I were being
worshipped.

\"I am the machine and God is the Operator. I act as He makes me act. I
speak as He makes me speak. Keep your raft, says Ramprasad, afloat on
the sea of life, Drifting up with the flood-tide, drifting down with the
ebb.

\"It is like the cast-off leaf before a gale; sometimes it is blown to a
good place and sometimes into the gutter, according to the direction of
the wind.

\"As the weaver said in the story: \'The robbery was committed by the
will of Rama, I was arrested by the police by the will of Rama, and
again, by the will of Rama, I was set free.\'

\"Hanuman once said to Rama: \'O Rama, I have taken refuge in Thee.
Bless me that I may have pure devotion to Thy Lotus Feet and that I may
not be caught in the spell of Thy world-bewitching maya.\'

\"Once a dying bullfrog said to Rama: \'O Rama, when caught by a snake I
cry for Your protection. But now I am about to die, struck by Your
arrow. Hence I am silent.\'

**God\'s nature like that of a child**

\"I used to see God directly with these very eyes, just as I see you.
Now I see divine visions in trance.

\"After realizing God a man becomes like a child. One acquires the
nature of the object one meditates upon. The nature of God is like that
of a child. As a child builds up his toy house and then breaks it down,
so God acts while creating, preserving, and destroying the universe.
Further, as the child is not under the control of any guna, so God is
beyond the three gunas-sattva, rajas, and tamas. That is why
paramahamsas keep five or ten children with them, that they may assume
their nature.\"

Sitting on the floor in the room was a young man from Agarpara about
twenty-two years old. Whenever he came to the temple garden, he would
take the Master aside, by a sign, and whisper his thoughts to him. He
was a new-comer. That day he was sitting on the floor near the Master.

MASTER (to the young man): \"A man can change his nature by imitating
another\'s character. He can get rid of a passion like lust by assuming
the feminine mood. He gradually comes to act exactly like a woman. I
have noticed that men who take female parts in the theatre speak like
women or brush their teeth like women while bathing. Come again on a
Tuesday or Saturday.

(To Prankrishna) \"Brahman and Śakti are inseparable. Unless you accept
Śakti, you will find the whole universe unreal-\'I\', \'you\', house,
buildings, and family. The world stands solid because the Primordial
Energy stands behind it. If there is no supporting pole, no framework
can be made, and without the framework there can be no beautiful image
of Durga.

\"Without giving up worldliness a man cannot awaken his spiritual
consciousness, nor can he realize God. He cannot but be a hypocrite as
long as he has even a trace of worldly desire. God cannot be realized
without guilelessness.

> *Cherish love within your heart; abandon cunning and deceit:*
>
> *Through service, worship, selflessness, does Rama\'s blessed vision
> come.*

Even those engaged in worldly activities, such as office work or
business, should hold to the truth. Truthfulness alone is the spiritual
discipline in the Kaliyuga.\"

PRANKRISHNA: \"Yes, sir. It is said in the Mahanirvana Tantra: \'O
Goddess, this religion enjoins it upon one to be truthful,
self-controlled, devoted to the welfare of others, unagitated, and
compassionate.\'\"

MASTER: \"Yes. But these ideas must be assimilated.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch. He was in an ecstatic
mood and looked at Rakhal. Suddenly he was filled with the tender
feeling of parental love toward his young disciple and spiritual child.
Presently he went into samādhi. The devotees sat speechless, looking at
the Master with wondering eyes.

Regaining partial consciousness, the Master said: \"Why is my spiritual
feeling kindled at the sight of Rakhal? The more you advance toward God,
the less you will see of His glories and grandeur. The aspirant at first
has a vision of the Goddess with ten arms;8 there is a great display of
power in that image. The next vision is that of the Deity with two arms;
there are no longer ten arms holding various weapons and missiles. Then
the aspirant has a vision of Gopala, in which there is no trace of
power. It is the form of a tender child. Beyond that there are other
visions also. The aspirant then sees only Light.

\"Reasoning and discrimination vanish after the attainment of God and
communion with Him in samādhi. How long does a man reason and
discriminate? As long as he is conscious of the manifold, as long as he
is aware of the universe, of embodied beings, of \'I\' and \'you\'. He
becomes silent when he is truly aware of Unity. This was the case with
Trailanga Swami.

\"Have you watched a feast given to the brahmins? At first there is a
great uproar. But the noise lessens as their stomachs become more and
more filled with food. When the last course of curd and sweets is
served, one hears only the sound \'soop, soop\' as they scoop up the
curd in their hands. There is no other sound. Next is the stage of
sleep-samādhi. There is no more uproar.

(To M. and Prankrishna) \"Many people talk of Brahmajnāna, but their
minds are always preoccupied with lower things: house, buildings, money,
name, and sense pleasures. As long as you stand at the foot of the
Monument,10 so long do you see horses, carriages, Englishmen, and
Englishwomen. But when you climb to its top, you behold the sky and the
ocean stretching to infinity. Then you do not enjoy buildings,
carriages, horses, or men. They look like ants.

\"All such things as attachment to the world and enthusiasm for \'woman
and gold\' disappear after the attainment of the Knowledge of Brahman.
Then comes the cessation of all passions. When the log burns, it makes a
crackling noise and one sees the flame. But when the burning is over and
only ash remains, then no more noise is heard. Thirst disappears with
the destruction of attachment. Finally comes peace.

\"The nearer you come to God, the more you feel peace. Peace, peace,
peace-supreme peace! The nearer you come to the Ganges, the more you
feel its coolness. You will feel completely soothed when you plunge into
the river.

\"But the universe and its created beings, and the twenty-four cosmic
principles, all exist because God exists. Nothing remains if God is
eliminated. The number increases if you put many zeros after the figure
one; but the zeros don\'t have any value if the one is not there.\"

The Master continued: \"There are some who come down, as it were, after
attaining the Knowledge of Brahman-after samādhi-and retain the \'ego of
Knowledge\' or the \'ego of Devotion\', just as there are people who, of
their own sweet will, stay in the market-place after the market breaks
up. This was the case with sages like Narada. They kept the \'ego of
Devotion\' for the purpose of teaching men. Sankaracharya kept the

\'ego of Knowledge\' for the same purpose.

\"God cannot be realized if there is the slightest attachment to the
things of the world. A thread cannot pass through the eye of a needle if
the tiniest fibre sticks out.

\"The anger and lust of a man who has realized God are only appearances.
They are like a burnt string. It looks like a string, but a mere puff
blows it away.

\"God is realized as soon as the mind becomes free from attachment.
Whatever appears in the Pure Mind is the voice of God. That which is
Pure Mind is also Pure Buddhi; that, again, is Pure Ātman, because there
is nothing pure but God. But in order to realize God one must go beyond
dharma and adharma.\"

The Master sang in his melodious voice:

> *Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to Kāli, the Wish-fulfilling
> Tree, And there beneath It gather the four fruits of life. . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna went out on the southeast verandah of his room and sat
down. Prankrishna and the other devotees accompanied him. Hazra, too,
was sitting there. The Master said to Prankrishna with a smile: \"Hazra
is not a man to be trifled with. If one finds the big dargah here, then
Hazra is the smaller dargah.\" All laughed at the Master\'s words. A
certain gentleman, Navakumar by name, came to the door and stood there.
At sight of the devotees he immediately left. \"Oh! Egotism incarnate!\"
Sri Ramakrishna remarked.

About half past nine in the morning Prankrishna took leave of the
Master. Soon afterwards a minstrel sang some devotional songs to the
accompaniment of a stringed instrument. The Master was listening to the
songs when Kedār Chatterji, a householder devotee, entered the room clad
in his office clothes. He was a man of devotional temperament and
cherished the attitude of the gopis of Vrindāvan. Words about God would
make him weep.

The sight of Kedār awakened in the Master\'s mind the episode of
Vrindāvan in Sri Krishna\'s life. Intoxicated with divine love, the
Master stood up and sang, addressing Kedār:

> *Tell me, friend, how far is the grove*
>
> *Where Krishna, my Beloved, dwells?*
>
> *His fragrance reaches me even here;*
>
> *But I am tired and can walk no farther. . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna assumed the attitude of Sri Radha to Krishna and went
into deep samādhi while singing the song. He stood there, still as a
picture on canvas, with tears of divine joy running down his cheeks.

Kedār knelt before the Master. Touching his feet, he chanted a hymn:

> *We worship the Brahman-Consciousness in the Lotus of the Heart,*
>
> *The Undifferentiated, who is adored by Hari, Hara, and Brahma;*
>
> *Who is attained by yogis in the depths of their meditation;*
>
> *The Scatterer of the fear of birth and death,*
>
> *The Essence of Knowledge and Truth, the Primal Seed of the world.*

After a time the Master regained consciousness of the relative world.
Soon Kedār took his leave and returned to his office in Calcutta.

At midday Ramlal brought the Master a plate of food that had been
offered in the Kāli temple. Like a child he ate a little of everything.

Later in the afternoon several Marwari devotees entered the Master\'s
room, where Rakhal and M. also were

seated.

A MARWARI DEVOTEE: \"Sir, what is the way?\"

**Two ways of God-realization**

MASTER: \"There are two ways. One is the path of discrimination, the
other is that of love. Discrimination means to know the distinction
between the Real and the unreal. God alone is the real and permanent
Substance; all else is illusory and impermanent. The magician alone is
real; his magic is illusory. This is discrimination.

\"Discrimination and renunciation. Discrimination means to know the
distinction between the Real and the unreal. Renunciation means to have
dispassion for the things of the world. One cannot acquire them all of a
sudden. They must be practised every day. One should renounce \'woman
and gold\' mentally at first. Then, by the will of God, one can renounce
it both mentally and outwardly. It is impossible to ask the people of
Calcutta to renounce all for the sake of God. One has to tell them to
renounce mentally.

**Constant practice urged**

\"Through the discipline of constant practice one is able to give up
attachment to \'woman and gold\'. That is what the Gita says. By
practice one acquires uncommon power of mind. Then one doesn\'t find it
difficult to subdue the sense-organs and to bring anger, lust, and the
like under control. Such a man behaves like a tortoise, which, once it
has tucked in its limbs, never puts them out. You cannot make the
tortoise put its limbs out again, though you chop it to pieces with an
axe.\"

MARWARI DEVOTEE: \"Revered sir, you just mentioned two paths. What is
the other path?\"

MASTER: \"The path of bhakti, or zealous love of God. Weep for God in
solitude, with a restless soul, and ask

Him to reveal Himself to you. Cry to your Mother Syama with a real cry,
O mind! And how can She hold

Herself from you? \"

MARWARI DEVOTEE: \"Sir, what is the meaning of the worship of the
Personal God? And what is the meaning of God without form or
attribute?\"

MASTER: \"As you recall your father by his photograph, so likewise the
worship of the image reveals in a flash the nature of Reality.

\"Do you know what God with form is like? Like bubbles rising on an
expanse of water, various divine forms are seen to rise out of the Great
Ākāśa of Consciousness. The Incarnation of God is one of these forms.
The Primal Energy sports, as it were, through the activities of a Divine
Incarnation.

\"What is there in mere scholarship? God can be attained by crying to
Him with a longing heart. There is no need to know many things.

\"He who is an Āchārya has to know different things. One needs a sword
and shield to kill others; but to kill oneself, a needle or a nail-knife
suffices.

\"One ultimately discovers God by trying to know who this \'I\' is. Is
this \'I\' the flesh, the bones, the blood, or the marrow? Is it the
mind or the buddhi? Analysing thus, you realize at last that you are
none of these. This is called the process of \'Neti, neti\', \'Not this,
not this\'. One can neither comprehend nor touch the Ātman. It is
without qualities or attributes.

\"But, according to the path of devotion, God has attributes. To a
devotee Krishna is Spirit, His Abode is Spirit, and everything about Him
is Spirit.\"

The Marwari devotees saluted the Master and took their leave.

At the approach of evening Sri Ramakrishna went out to look at the
sacred river. The lamp was lighted in his room. The Master chanted the
hallowed name of the Divine Mother and meditated on Her. Then the
evening worship began in the various temples. The sound of gongs,
floating on the air, mingled with the murmuring voice of the river.
Peace and blessedness reigned everywhere.

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 8**

THE MASTER\'S BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION AT DAKSHINESWAR

> Sunday, February 18, 1883

SRI RAMAKRISHNA arrived at Govinda Mukherji\'s house at Belgharia, near
Calcutta. Besides Narendra, Ram, and other devotees, some of Govinda\'s
neighbours were present. The Master first sang and danced with the
devotees. After the kirtan they sat down. Many saluted the Master. Now
and then he would say, \"Bow before God.\"

**Master\'s attitude toward the wicked**

\"It is God alone\", he said, \"who has become all this. But in certain
places- for instance, in a holy man-there is a greater manifestation
than in others. You may say, there are wicked men also. That is true,
even as there are tigers and lions; but one need not hug the \'tiger
God\'. One should keep away from him and salute him from a distance.
Take water, for instance. Some water may be drunk, some may be used for
worship, some for bathing, and some only for washing dishes.\"

**Paths of knowledge and devotion**

A NEIGHBOUR: \"Revered sir, what are the doctrines of Vedanta?\"

MASTER: \"The Vedantist says, \'I am He.\' Brahman is real and the world
illusory. Even the \'I\' is illusory. Only the Supreme Brahman exists.

\"But the \'I\' cannot be got rid of. Therefore it is good to have the
feeling, \'I am the servant of God, His son, His devotee.\'

\"For the Kāli Yuga the path of bhakti is especially good. One can
realize God through bhakti too. As long as one is conscious of the body,
one is also conscious of objects. Form, taste, smell, sound, and
touch-these are the objects. It is extremely difficult to get rid of the
consciousness of objects. And one cannot realize \'I am He\' as long as
one is aware of objects.

\"The sannyasi is very little conscious of worldly objects. But the
householder is always engrossed in them. Therefore it is good for him to
feel, \'I am the servant of God.\'\"

**God\'s name destroys sin**

NEIGHBOUR: \"Sir, we are sinners. What will happen to us?\"

MASTER: \"All the sins of the body flyaway if one chants the name of God
and sings His glories. The birds of sin dwell in the tree of the body.
Singing the name of God is like clapping your hands. As, at a clap of
the hands, the birds in the tree flyaway, so do our sins disappear at
the chanting of God\'s name and glories.

\"Again, you find that the water of a reservoir dug in a meadow is
evaporated by the heat of the sun. Likewise, the water of the reservoir
of sin is dried up by the singing of the name and glories of God.

\"You must practise it every day. The other day, at the circus, I saw a
horse running at top speed, with an Englishwoman standing on one foot on
its back. How much she must have practised to acquire that skill!

\"Weep at least once to see God.

\"These, then, are the two means: practice and passionate attachment to
God, that is to say, restlessness of the soul to see Him.\"

Sri Ramakrishna began his midday meal with the devotees. It was about
one o\'clock. A devotee sang in the

courtyard below:

> *Awake, Mother! Awake! How long Thou hast been asleep*
>
> *In the lotus of the Muladhara!*
>
> *Fulfil Thy secret function, Mother:*
>
> *Rise to the thousand-petalled lotus within the head,*
>
> *Where mighty Śiva has His dwelling;*
>
> *Swiftly pierce the six lotuses*
>
> *And take away my grief, O Essence of Consciousness!*

Hearing the song, Sri Ramakrishna went into samādhi; his whole body
became still, and his hand remained touching the plate of food. He could
eat no more. After a long time his mind came down partially to the plane
of the sense world, and he said, \"I want to go downstairs.\" A devotee
led him down very carefully. Still in an abstracted mood, he sat near
the singer. The song had ended. The Master said to him very humbly,
\"Sir, I want to hear the chanting of the Mother\'s name again.\"

The musician sang:

> *Awake, Mother! Awake! How long Thou hast been asleep*
>
> *In the lotus of the Muladhara! . . .*
>
> *The Master again went into ecstasy.*

**February 25, 1883**

After his noon meal the Master conversed with the devotees. Ram, Kedār,
Nityagopal, M., and others had arrived from Calcutta. Rakhal, Harish,
Lātu, and Hazra were living with the Master. Mr.Choudhury, who had three
or four university degrees and was a government officer, was also
present. He had recently lost his wife and had visited the Master
several times for peace of mind.

MASTER (to Ram and the other devotees): \"Devotees like Rakhal,
Narendra, and Bhavanath may be called *Nityasiddha*. Their spiritual
consciousness has been awake since their very birth. They assume human
bodies only to impart spiritual illumination to others.

\"There is another class of devotees, known as K*ripasiddha*, that is to
say, those on whom the grace of God descends all of a sudden and who at
once attain His vision and Knowledge. Such people may be likened to a
room that has been dark a thousand years, which, when a lamp is brought
into it, becomes light immediately, not little by little.

**Mystery of God\'s ways**

\"Those who lead a householder\'s life should practise spiritual
discipline; they should pray eagerly to God in solitude. (To Mr.
Choudhury) God cannot be realized through scholarship. Who, indeed, can
understand the things of the Spirit through reason? No, all should
strive for devotion to the Lotus Feet of God.

\"Infinite are the glories of God! How little can you fathom them! Can
you ever find out the meaning of God\'s ways?

\"Bhishma was none other than one of the eight Vasus, but even he shed
tears on his bed of arrows. He said: \'How astonishing! God Himself is
the companion of the Pandava brothers, and still there is no end to
their troubles and sorrows!\' Who can ever understand the ways of God?

\"A man thinks, \'I have practised a little prayer and austerity; so I
have gained a victory over others.\' But victory and defeat lie with
God. I have seen a prostitute dying in the Ganges and retaining
consciousness to the end.\"

**God-vision through pure love**

MR. CHOUDHURY: \"How can one see God?\"

MASTER: \"Not with these eyes. God gives one divine eyes; and only then
can one behold Him. God gave Arjuna divine eyes so that he might see His
Universal Form.

\"Your philosophy is mere speculation. It only reasons. God cannot be
realized that way.

\"God cannot remain unmoved if you have raga-bhakti, that is, love of
God with passionate attachment to Him. Do you know how fond God is of
His devotees\' love? It is like the cow\'s fondness for fodder mixed
with oil-cake. The cow gobbles it down greedily.

\"Raga-bhakti is pure love of God, a love that seeks God alone and not
any worldly end. Prahlada had it. Suppose you go to a wealthy man every
day, but you seek no favour of him; you simply love to see him. If he
wants to show you favour, you say: \'No, sir. I don\'t need anything. I
came just to see you.\' Such is love of God for its own sake. You simply
love God and don\'t want anything from Him, in return.\"

Saying this, the Master sang:

> *Though I am never loath to grant salvation,*
>
> *I hesitate indeed to grant pure love.*
>
> *Whoever wins pure love surpasses all;*
>
> *He is adored by men;*
>
> *He triumphs over the three worlds. . . .*

He continued, \"The gist of the whole thing is that one must develop
passionate yearning for God and practise discrimination and
renunciation.\"

**Guru and Ishta**

MR. CHOUDHURY: \"Sir, is it not possible to have the vision of God
without the help of a guru?\"

MASTER: \"Satchidananda Himself is the Guru. At the end of the
*Shavasadhana*, just when the vision of the Ishta is about to take
place, the guru appears before the aspirant and says to him, \'Behold!
There is your Ishta.\' Saying this, the guru merges in the Ishta. He who
is the guru is also the Ishta. The guru is the thread that leads to God.
Women perform a ritualistic worship known as the \'Ananta-vrata\', the
object of worship being the Infinite. But actually the Deity worshipped
is Vishnu. In Him are the \'infinite\' forms of God.

(To Ram and the other devotees) \"If you asked me which form of God you
should meditate upon, I should say: Fix your attention on that form
which appeals to you most; but know for certain that all forms are the
forms of one God alone.

\"Never harbour malice toward anyone. Śiva, Kāli, and Hari are but
different forms of that One. He is blessed indeed who has known all as
one. Outwardly he appears as Śiva\'s devotee, But in his heart he
worships Kāli, the Blissful Mother, And with his tongue he chants aloud
Lord Hari\'s name.

\"The body does not endure without a trace of lust, anger, and the like.
You should try to reduce them to a minimum.\"

Looking at Kedār, the Master said: \"He is very nice. He accepts both
the Absolute and the Relative. He believes in Brahman, but he also
accepts the gods and Divine Incarnations in human form.\"

In Kedār\'s opinion Sri Ramakrishna was such an Incarnation.

Looking at Nityagopal, the Master said to the devotees, \"He is in a
lofty mood.

(To Nityagopal) \"Don\'t go there too often. You may go once in a while.
She may be a devotee, but she is a woman too. Therefore I warn you.

\"The sannyasi must observe very strict discipline. He must not look
even at the picture of a woman. But this rule doesn\'t apply to
householders. An aspirant should not associate with a woman, even though
she is very much devoted to God. A sannyasi, even though he may have
subdued his passions, should follow this discipline to set an example to
householders.

\"Worldly people learn renunciation by seeing the complete renunciation
of a monk; otherwise they sink more and more. A sannyasi is a world
teacher.\"

**Friday, March 9, 1883**

**Life of worldliness**

About nine o\'clock in the morning the Master was seated in his room
with Rakhal, M., and a few other devotees. It was the day of the new
moon. As usual with him on such days, Sri Ramakrishna entered again and
again into communion with the Divine Mother. He said to the devotees:
\"God alone exists, and all else is unreal. The Divine Mother has kept
all deluded by Her maya. Look at men. Most of them are entangled in
worldliness. They suffer so much, but still they have the same
attachment to \'woman and gold\'. The camel eats thorny shrubs, and
blood gushes from its mouth; still it will eat thorns. While suffering
pain at the time of delivery, a woman says, \'Ah! I shall never go to my
husband again.\' But afterwards she forgets.

\"The truth is that no one seeks God. There are people who eat the
prickly leaves of the pineapple and not the fruit.\"

DEVOTEE: \"Sir, why has God put us in the world?\"

MASTER: \"The world is the field of action. Through action one acquires
knowledge. The guru instructs the disciple to perform certain works and
refrain from others. Again, he advises the pupil to perform action
without desiring the result. The impurity of the mind is destroyed
through the performance of duty. It is like getting rid of a disease by
means of medicine, under the instruction of a competent physician.

\"Why doesn\'t God free us from the world? Ah, He will free us when the
disease is cured. He will liberate us from the world when we are through
with the enjoyment of \'woman and gold\'. Once a man registers his name
in the hospital, he cannot run away. The doctor will not let him go away
unless his illness is completely cured.\"

**Master\'s love for Rakhal**

During these days Sri Ramakrishna\'s heart overflowed with motherly love
like the love Yaśoda felt for Krishna. So he kept Rakhal with him.
Rakhal felt toward the Master as a child feels toward its mother. He
would sit leaning on the Master\'s lap as a young child leans on its
mother while sucking her breast.

Rakhal was thus seated by the Master when a man entered the room and
said that a high tide was coming in the Ganges. The Master and the
devotees ran to the Panchavati to see it. At the sight of a boat being
tossed by the tide, Sri Ramakrishna exclaimed: \"Look! Look! I hope
nothing happens to it.\"

They all sat in the Panchavati. The Master asked M. to explain the cause
of the tide. M. drew on the ground the figures of the sun, moon, and
earth and tried to explain gravitation, ebb-tide, flood-tide, new moon,
full moon, eclipse, and so forth.

MASTER (to M.): \"Stop it! I can\'t follow you. It makes me dizzy. My
head is aching. Well, how can they know of things so far off?

\"You see, during my childhood I could paint well; but arithmetic would
make my head spin. I couldn\'t learn simple arithmetic.\"

Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room with the devotees. Looking at a
picture of Yaśoda, on the wall, he said:

\"It is not well done. She looks like a garland-seller.\"

**Adhar\'s first visit**

The Master enjoyed a nap after his noon meal. Adhar and other devotees
gradually gathered. This was Adhar\'s first visit. He was a deputy
magistrate and about thirty years old.

**Much reasoning condemned**

ADHAR (to the Master): \"Sir, I have a question to ask. Is it good to
sacrifice animals before the Deity? It certainly involves killing.\"

MASTER: \"The sastra prescribes sacrifice on special occasions. Such
sacrifice is not harmful. Take, for instance, the sacrifice of a goat on
the eighth day of the full or new moon.

\"I am now in such a state of mind that I cannot watch a sacrifice. Also
I cannot eat meat offered to the Divine Mother. Therefore I first touch
my finger to it, then to my head, lest She should be angry with me.

\"Again, in a certain state of mind I see God in all beings, even in an
ant. At that time, if I see a living being die, I find consolation in
the thought that it is the death of the body, the soul being beyond life
and death.

\"One should not reason too much; it is enough if one loves the Lotus
Feet of the Mother. Too much reasoning throws the mind into confusion.
You get clear water if you drink from the surface of a pool. Put your
hand deeper and stir the water, and it becomes muddy. Therefore pray to
God for devotion.

\"Behind Dhruva\'s devotion there was desire. He practised austerities
to gain his father\'s kingdom. But Prahlada\'s love for God was
motiveless-a love that sought no return.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"How can one realize God?\"

MASTER: \"Through that kind of love. But one must force one\'s demand on
God. One should be able to say:

\'O God, wilt Thou not reveal Thyself to me? I will cut my throat with a
knife.\' This is the tamas of bhakti.\"

DEVOTEE: \"Can one see God?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, surely. One can see both aspects of God-God with form and
without form. One can see God with form, the Embodiment of Spirit.
Again, God can be directly perceived in a man with a tangible form.
Seeing an Incarnation of God is the same as seeing God Himself. God is
born on earth as man in every age.\"

**March 11, 1883**

**Master\'s birthday celebration**

It was Sri Ramakrishna\'s birthday. Many of his disciples and devotees
wanted to celebrate the happy occasion at the Dakśineśwar temple garden.

From early morning the devotees streamed in, alone or in parties. After
the morning worship in the temples sweet music was played in the
nahabat. It was springtime. The trees, creepers, and plants were covered
with new leaves and blossoms. The very air seemed laden with joy. And
the hearts of the devotees were glad on this auspicious day.

M. arrived early in the morning and found the Master talking smilingly
to Bhavanath, Rakhal, and Kalikrishna.

M. prostrated himself before him.

MASTER (to M.): \"I am glad you have come.

(To the devotees) \"One cannot be spiritual as long as one has shame,
hatred, or fear. Great will be the joy today. But those fools who will
not sing or dance, mad with God\'s name, will never attain God. How can
one feel any shame or fear when the names of God are sung? Now sing, all
of you.\"

Bhavanath and his friend Kalikrishna sang:

> *Thrice blessed is this day of joy!*
>
> *May all of us unite, O Lord,*
>
> *To preach Thy true religion here*
>
> *In India\'s holy land!*
>
> *Thou dwellest in each human heart;*
>
> *Thy name, resounding everywhere,*
>
> *Fills the four corners of the sky.*
>
> *Today Thy devotees proclaim*
>
> *Thy boundless majesty.*
>
> *We seek not wealth or friends or fame,*
>
> *O Lord! No other hope is ours.*
>
> *For Thee alone Thy devotees*
>
> *Long with unflagging love.*
>
> *Safe at Thy feet, what fear have we*
>
> *Of death or danger? We have found*
>
> *The Fount of Immortality.*
>
> *To Thee the victory, O Lord!*
>
> *To Thee the victory!*

As Sri Ramakrishna listened to the song with folded hands, his mind
soared to a far-off realm. He remained absorbed in meditation a long
time. After a while Kalikrishna whispered something to Bhavanath. Then
he bowed before the Master and rose. Sri Ramakrishna was surprised. He
asked, \"Where are you going?\"

BHAVANATH: \"He is going away on a little business.\"

MASTER: \"What is it about?\"

BHAVANATH: \"He is going to the Baranagore Workingmen\'s Institute.\"

MASTER: \"It\'s his bad luck. A stream of bliss will flow here today. He
could have enjoyed it. But how unlucky!\"

Sri Ramakrishna did not feel well; so he decided not to bathe in the
Ganges. About nine o\'clock a few jars of water were taken from the
river, and with the help of the devotees he finished his bath on the
verandah east of his room.

After bathing, the Master put on a new wearing-cloth, all the while
chanting the name of God. Accompanied by one or two disciples he walked
across the courtyard to the temple of Kāli, still chanting Her hallowed
name. His eyes had an indrawn look, like that of a bird hatching her
eggs.

On entering the temple, he prostrated himself before the image and
worshipped the Divine Mother. But he did not observe any ritual of
worship. Now he would offer flowers and sandal-paste at the feet of the
image, and now he would put them on his own head. After finishing the
worship in his own way, he asked Bhavanath to carry the green coconut
that had been offered to the Mother. He also visited the images of Radha
and Krishna in the Vishnu temple.

When the Master returned to his room, he found that other devotees had
arrived, among them Ram, Nityagopal, and Kedār. They all saluted the
Master, who greeted them cordially.

He asked Nityagopal, \"Will you eat something now?\" \"Yes\", the
devotee answered. Nityagopal, who was twenty-three or twenty-four years
old and unmarried, was like a child. His mind was always soaring in the
spiritual realm. He visited the Master sometimes alone and sometimes in
Ram\'s company. The Master had observed the spiritual state of his mind
and had become very fond of him. He remarked now and then that
Nityagopal was in the state of a paramahamsa.

**Warning to monks**

After Nityagopal had finished eating, the Master took him aside and gave
him various instructions.

A certain woman, about thirty-one years old and a great devotee, often
visited Sri Ramakrishna and held him in high respect. She had been much
impressed by Nityagopal\'s spiritual state and, looking upon him as her
own son, often invited him to her house.

MASTER (to Nityagopal): \"Do you go there?\"

NITYAGOPAL (like a child): \"Yes, I do. She takes me\".

MASTER: \"Beware, holy man! Go there once in a great while, but not
frequently; otherwise you will slip from the ideal. Maya is nothing but
\'woman and gold\'. A holy man must live away from woman. All sink
there. \'Even Brahma and Vishnu struggle for life in that whirlpool.\'
\"

Nityagopal listened to these words attentively.

M. (to himself): \"How strange! This young man has developed the state
of a paramahamsa. That is what the Master says now and then. Is there
still a possibility of his falling into danger in spite of his high
spiritual state? What an austere rule is laid down for a sādhu! He may
slip from his ideal by associating intimately with women. How can an
ordinary man expect to attain liberation unless such a high ideal is set
by holy men? The woman in question is very devout; but still there is
danger. Now I understand why Chaitanya punished his disciple, the
younger Haridas, so severely. In spite of his teacher\'s prohibition,
Haridas conversed with a widow devotee. But he was a sannyasi. Therefore
Chaitanya banished him. What a severe punishment! How hard is the rule
for one who has accepted the life of renunciation! Again, what love the
Master cherishes for this devotee! He is warning him even now, lest he
should run into danger in the future.\"

\"Beware, holy man!\" These words of the Master echoed in the hearts of
the devotees, like the distant rumbling of thunder.

The Master went with the devotees to the northeast verandah of his room.
Among them was a householder from the village of Dakśineśwar, who
studied Vedanta philosophy at home. He had been discussing Om with Kedār
before the Master. He said, \"This Eternal Word, the Anāhata Śabda, is
ever present both within and without.\"

MASTER: \"But the Word is not enough. There must be something indicated
by the Word. Can your name alone make me happy? Complete happiness is
not possible for me unless I see you.\"

DEVOTEE: \"That Eternal Word itself is Brahman.\"

MASTER (to Kedār): \"Oh, don\'t you understand? He upholds the doctrine
of the rishis of olden times. They

once said to Rama: \'O Rama, we know You only as the son of Dasaratha.
Let sages like Bharadvaja worship You as God Incarnate. We want to
realize Brahman, the Indivisible Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute.\'
At these words Rama smiled and went away.\"

KEDĀR: \"Those rishis could not recognize Rama as an Incarnation of God.
They must have been fools,\"

MASTER (seriously): \"Please don\'t say such a thing. People worship God
according to their tastes and

temperaments. The mother cooks the same fish differently for her
children, that each one may have what suits his stomach. For some she
cooks the rich dish of *pilau*. But not all the children can digest it.
For those

with weak stomachs she prepares soup. Some, again, like fried fish or
pickled fish. It depends on one\'s taste.

**Incarnation of God**

\"The rishis followed the path of jnāna. Therefore they sought to
realize Brahman, the Indivisible Existence-

Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. But those who follow the path of devotion seek
an Incarnation of God, to enjoy the sweetness of bhakti. The darkness of
the mind disappears when God is realized. In the Purana it is said that
it was as if a hundred suns were shining when Rama entered the court.
Why, then, weren\'t the courtiers burnt up? It was because the
brilliance of Rama was not like that of a material object. As the lotus
blooms when the sun rises, so the lotus of the heart of the people
assembled in the court burst into blossom.\"

As the Master uttered these words, standing before the devotees, he
suddenly fell into an ecstatic mood. His mind was withdrawn from
external objects. No sooner did he say, \"the lotus of the heart burst
into blossom\", than he went into deep samādhi. He stood motionless, his
countenance beaming and his lips parted in a smile.

After a long time he returned to the normal consciousness of the world.
He drew a long breath and repeatedly chanted the name of Rama, every
word showering nectar into the hearts of the devotees. The Master sat
down, the others seating themselves around him.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Ordinary people do not recognize the advent
of an Incarnation of God. He comes in secret. Only a few of His intimate
disciples can recognize Him. That Rama was both Brahman Absolute and a
perfect Incarnation of God in human form was known only to twelve
rishis. The other sages said to Him, \'Rama, we know You only as
Dasaratha\'s son.\'

\"Can everyone comprehend Brahman, the Indivisible
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute? He alone has attained perfect love
of God who, having reached the Absolute, keeps himself in the realm of
the Relative in order to enjoy the divine *lila*. A man can describe the
ways and activities of the Queen if he has previously visited her in
England. Only then will his description of the Queen be correct. Sages
like Bharadvaja adored Rama and said: \'O Rama, You are nothing but the
Indivisible Satchidananda. You have appeared before us as a human being,
but You look like a man because You have shrouded Yourself with Your own
maya.\' These rishis were great devotees of Rama: and had supreme love
for God.\"

**Master\'s different spiritual moods**

Presently some devotees from Konnagar arrived, singing kirtan to the
accompaniment of drums and cymbals. As they reached the northeast
verandah of Sri Ramakrishna\'s room, the Master joined in the music,
dancing with them intoxicated with divine joy. Now and then he went into
samādhi, standing still as a statue. While he was in one of these states
of divine unconsciousness, the devotees put thick garlands of jasmine
around his neck. The enchanting form of the Master reminded the devotees
of Chaitanya, another Incarnation of God. The Master passed alternately
through three moods of divine consciousness: the inmost, when he
completely lost all knowledge of the outer world; the semi-conscious,
when he danced with the devotees in an ecstasy of love; and the
conscious, when he joined them in loud singing. It was indeed a sight
for the gods, to see the Master standing motionless in samādhi, with
fragrant garlands hanging from his neck, his countenance beaming with
love, and the devotees singing and dancing around him.

When it was time for his noon meal, Sri Ramakrishna put on a new yellow
cloth and sat on the small couch.

His golden complexion, blending with his yellow cloth, enchanted the
eyes of the devotees.

After his meal Sri Ramakrishna rested a little on the small couch.
Inside and outside his room crowded the devotees, among them Kedār,
Suresh, Ram, Manomohan, Girindra, Rakhal, Bhavanath, and M. Rakhal\'s
father was also present.

**Efficacy of earnest japa**

A Vaishnava goswami was seated in the room. The Master said to him:
\"Well, what do you say? What is the way?\"

GOSWAMI: \"Sir, the chanting of God\'s name is enough. The scriptures
emphasize the sanctity of God\'s name for the Kaliyuga.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, there is no doubt about the sanctity of God\'s name. But
can a mere name achieve anything,

without the yearning love of the devotee behind it? One should feel
great restlessness of soul for the vision of God. Suppose a man repeats
the name of God mechanically, while his mind is absorbed in \'woman and
gold\'. Can he achieve anything? Mere muttering of magic words doesn\'t
cure one of the pain of a spider or scorpion sting. One must also apply
the smoke of burning cow-dung.\"

GOSWAMI: \"But what about Ajamila then? He was a great sinner; there was
no sin he had not indulged in. But he uttered the name of Narayana on
his death-bed, calling his son, who also had that name. And thus he was
liberated.\"

MASTER: \"Perhaps Ajamila had done many spiritual things in his past
births. It is also said that he once practised austerity; besides, those
were the last moments of his life. What is the use of giving an elephant
a bath? It will cover itself with dirt and dust again and become its
former self. But if someone removes the dust from its body and gives it
a bath just before it enters the stable, then the elephant remains
clean. .

\"Suppose a man becomes pure by chanting the holy name of God, but
immediately afterwards commits many sins. He has no strength of mind. He
doesn\'t take a vow not to repeat his sins. A bath in the Ganges
undoubtedly absolves one of all sins; but what does that avail? They say
that the sins perch on the trees along the bank of the Ganges. No sooner
does the man come back from the holy waters than the old sins jump on
his shoulders from the trees. (All laugh.) The same old sins take
possession of him again. He is hardly out of the water before they fall
upon him.

\"Therefore I say, chant the name of God, and with it pray to Him that
you may have love for Him. Pray to God that your attachment to such
transitory things as wealth, name, and creature comforts may become less
and less every day.

**Dogmatism condemned**

(To the goswami) \"With sincerity and earnestness one can realize God
through all religions. The Vaishnavas will realize God, and so will the
Saktas, the Vedantists, and the Brahmos. The Mussalmans and Christians
will realize Him too. All will certainly realize God if they are earnest
and sincere.

\"Some people indulge in quarrels, saying, \'One cannot attain anything
unless one worships our Krishna\', or, \'Nothing can be gained without
the worship of Kāli, our Divine Mother\', or, \'One cannot be saved
without accepting the Christian religion.\' This is pure dogmatism. The
dogmatist says, \'My religion alone is true, and the religions of others
are false.\' This is a bad attitude. God can be reached by different
paths.

\"Further, some say that God has form and is not formless. Thus they
start quarrelling. A Vaishnava quarrels with a Vedantist.

\"One can rightly speak of God only after one has seen Him. He who has
seen God knows really and truly that God has form and that He is
formless as well. He has many other aspects that cannot be described.

**Parable of the elephant and the blind men**

\"Once some blind men chanced to come near an animal that someone told
them was an elephant. They were asked what the elephant was like. The
blind men began to feel its body. One of them said the elephant was like
a pillar; he had touched only its leg. Another said it was like a
winnowing-fan; he had touched only its ear. In this way the others,
having touched its tail or belly, gave their different versions of the
elephant. Just so, a man who has seen only one aspect of God limits God
to that alone. It is his conviction that God cannot be anything else.

**Illustration of the ocean and the ice**

(To the goswami) \"How can you say that the only truth about God is that
He has form? It is undoubtedly true that God comes down to earth in a
human form, as in the case of Krishna. And it is true as well that God
reveals Himself to His devotees in various forms. But it is also true
that God is formless; He is the Indivisible

Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. He has been described in the Vedas
both as formless and as endowed with form. He is also described there
both as attributeless and as endowed with attributes.

\"Do you know what I mean? Satchidananda is like an infinite ocean.
Intense cold freezes the water into ice, which floats on the ocean in
blocks of various forms. Likewise, through the cooling influence of
bhakti, one sees forms of God in the Ocean of the Absolute. These forms
are meant for the bhaktas, the lovers of God. But when the Sun of
Knowledge rises, the ice melts; it becomes the same water it was before.
Water above and water below, everywhere nothing but water. Therefore a
prayer in the Bhagavata says: \'O Lord, Thou hast form, and Thou art
also formless. Thou walkest before us, O Lord, in the shape of a man;
again, Thou hast been described in the Vedas as beyond words and
thought.\'

\"But you may say that for certain devotees God assumes eternal forms.
There are places in the ocean where the ice doesn\'t melt at all. It
assumes the form of quartz.\"

KEDĀR: \"It is said in the Bhagavata that Vyāsa asked God\'s forgiveness
for his three transgressions. He said: \'O Lord, Thou art formless, but
I have thought of Thee in my meditation as endowed with form; Thou art
beyond speech, but I have sung Thee hymns; Thou art the All-pervading
Spirit, but I have made pilgrimages to sacred places. Be gracious, O
Lord, and forgive these three transgressions of mine.\'\"

MASTER: \"Yes, God has form and He is formless too. Further, He is
beyond both form and formlessness. No one can limit Him.\"

Rakhal\'s father was sitting in the room. At that time Rakhal was
staying with the Master. After his mother\'s death his father had
married a second time. Now and then he came to Dakśineśwar because of
Rakhal\'s being there. He did not raise much objection to his son\'s
living with the Master. Being a wealthy man of the world, he was always
involved in litigation. There were lawyers and deputy magistrates among
Sri Ramakrishna\'s visitors. Rakhal\'s father found it profitable to
cultivate their acquaintance, since he expected to be benefited by their
counsels in worldly matters.

Now and then the Master cast a glance at Rakhal\'s father. It was his
cherished desire that Rakhal should live with him permanently at
Dakśineśwar.

**Rakhal\'s inborn spiritual nature**

MASTER (to Rakhal\'s father and the devotees): \"Ah, what a nice
character Rakhal has developed! Look at his face and every now and then
you will notice his lips moving. Inwardly he repeats the name of God,
and so his lips move.

**Parable of the Homa bird**

\"Youngsters like him belong to the class of the ever-perfect. They are
born with God-Consciousness. No sooner do they grow a little older than
they realize the danger of coming in contact with the world. There is
the parable of the Homa bird in the Vedas. The bird lives high up in the
sky and never descends to earth. It lays its egg in the sky, and the egg
begins to fall. But the bird lives in such a high region that the egg
hatches while falling. The fledgling comes out and continues to fall.
But it is still so high that while falling it grows wings and its eyes
open. Then the young bird perceives that it is dashing down toward the
earth and will be instantly killed. The moment it sees the ground, it
turns and shoots up toward its mother in the sky. Then its one goal is
to reach its mother.

\"Youngsters like Rakhal are like that bird. From their very childhood
they are afraid of the world, and their one thought is how to reach the
Mother, how to realize God.

\"You may ask, \'How is it possible for these boys, born of worldly
parents and living among the worldly-minded, to develop such knowledge
and devotion?\' It can be explained. If a pea falls into a heap of dung,
it germinates into a pea-plant none the less. The peas that grow on that
plant serve many useful purposes. Because it was sown in dung, will it
produce another kind of plant?

\"Ah, what a sweet nature Rakhal has nowadays! And why shouldn\'t it be
so? If the yam is a good one, its shoots also become good. (All laugh.)
Like father like son.\"

M. (aside to Girindra): \"How well he has explained God with and without
form! Do the Vaishnavas believe only in God with form?\"

GIRINDRA: \"Perhaps so. They are one-sided.\"

1.  \"Did you understand what he meant by the \'eternal form\' of God?
    That \'quartz\'? I couldn\'t grasp it well.\" MASTER (to M.):
    \"Well, what are you talking about?\"

M. and Girindra smiled and remained silent.

Later in the afternoon the devotees were singing in the Panchavati,
where the Master joined them. They sang together in praise of the Divine
Mother:

> *High in the heaven of the Mother\'s feet, my mind was soaring like a
> kite,*
>
> *When came a blast of sin\'s rough wind that drove it swiftly toward
> the earth.*
>
> *Maya disturbed its even flight by bearing down upon one side,*
>
> *And I could make it rise no more.*
>
> *Entangled in the twisting string of love for children and for wife,*
>
> *Alas! my kite was rent in twain.*
>
> *It lost its crest of wisdom soon and downward plunged as I let it
> go;*
>
> *How could it hope to fly again, when all its top was torn away?*
>
> *Though fastened with devotion\'s cord, it came to grief in playing
> here;*
>
> *Its six opponents worsted it.*
>
> *Now Nareschandra rues this game of smiles and tears, and thinks it
> better*
>
> *Never to have played at all.*

The singing continued. Sri Ramakrishna danced with the devotees. They
sang:

> *The black bee of my mind is drawn in sheer delight*
>
> *To the blue lotus flower of Mother Syama\'s feet,*
>
> *The blue flower of the feet of Kāli, Śiva\'s Consort;*
>
> *Tasteless, to the bee, are the blossoms of desire.*
>
> *My Mother\'s feet are black, and black, too, is the bee;*
>
> *Black is made one with black! This much of the mystery*
>
> *My mortal eyes behold, then hastily retreat.*
>
> *But Kamalakanta\'s hopes are answered in the end;*
>
> *He swims in the Sea of Bliss, unmoved by joy or pain.*

The kirtan went on:

> *O Mother, what a machine is this that Thou hast made!*
>
> *What pranks Thou playest with this toy*
>
> *Three and a half cubits high!*
>
> *Hiding Thyself within, Thou holdest the guiding string;*
>
> *But the machine, not knowing it,*
>
> *Still believes it moves by itself.*
>
> *Whoever finds the Mother remains a machine no more;*
>
> *Yet some machines have even bound*
>
> *The Mother Herself with the string of Love.*

It was a very happy day for all.

The Master, accompanied by M., was coming back to his room, when he met
Trailokya, a Brahmo devotee, on the way. Trailokya bowed before the
Master.

MASTER: \"They are singing in the Panchavati. Won\'t you go there?\"

TRAILOKYA: \"What shall I do there?\"

MASTER: \"Why, you will enjoy the music.\"

TRAILOKYA: \"I have been there already.\"

MASTER: \"Well, well! That\'s good.\"

It was about six o\'clock in the evening. The Master was sitting with
the devotees on the southeast verandah of his room.

MASTER: \"A holy man who has renounced the world will of course chant
the name of God. That is only natural. He has no other duties to
perform. If he meditates on God it shouldn\'t surprise anybody. On the
other hand, if he fails to think of God or chant His holy name, then
people will think ill of him.

\"But it is a great deal to his credit if a householder utters the name
of the Lord. Think of King Janaka. What courage he had, indeed! He
fenced with two swords, the one of Knowledge and the other of work. He
possessed the perfect Knowledge of Brahman and also was devoted to the
duties of the world. An unchaste woman attends to the minutest duties of
the world, but her mind always dwells on her paramour.

\"The constant company of holy men is necessary. The holy man introduces
one to God.\"

KEDĀR: \"Yes, sir. The great soul is born in the world for the
redemption of humanity. He leads others to God, just as a locomotive
engine takes along with it a long train of carriages. Or again, he is
like a river or lake that quenches the thirst of many people.\"

The devotees were ready to return home. One by one they saluted the
Master. At the sight of Bhavanath Sri Ramakrishna said: \"Don\'t go away
today. The very sight of you inspires me.\" Bhavanath had not yet
entered into worldly life. A youth of twenty, he had a fair complexion
and handsome features. He shed tears of joy on hearing the name of God.
The Master looked on him as the embodiment of Narayana.

**Thursday, March 29, 1883**

The Master had taken a little rest after his noon meal, when a few
devotees arrived from Calcutta, among them Amrita and the well-known
singer of the Brahmo Samaj, Trailokya.

Rakhal was not feeling well. The Master was greatly worried about him
and said to the devotees: \"You see, Rakhal is not well. Will soda-water
help him? What am I to do now? Rakhal, please take the prasad from the
Jagannath temple.\"

Even as he spoke these words the Master underwent a strange
transformation. He looked at Rakhal with the infinite tenderness of a
mother and affectionately uttered the name of Govinda. Did he see in
Rakhal the manifestation of God Himself? The disciple was a young boy of
pure heart who had renounced all attraction to lust and greed. And Sri
Ramakrishna was intoxicated day and night with love of God. At the sight
of Rakhal his eyes expressed the tender feelings of a mother, a love
like that which had filled the heart of Mother Yaśoda at the sight of
the Baby Krishna. The devotees gazed at the Master in wonder as he went
into deep samādhi. As his soul soared into the realm of Divine
Consciousness, his body became motionless, his eyes were fixed on

the tip of his nose, and his breathing almost ceased.

**Renunciation, false and true**

An unknown Bengali, dressed in the ochre cloth of a monk, entered the
room and sat on the floor. The Master\'s mind was coming down to the
ordinary plane of consciousness. Presently he began to talk, though the
spell of samādhi still lingered.

MASTER (at the sight of the ochre cloth): \"Why this gerrua? Should one
put on such a thing for a mere fancy? A man once said, \'I have
exchanged the Chandi for a drum.\' At first he used to sing the holy
songs of the Chandi; now he beats the drum. (All laugh.)

\"There are three or four varieties of renunciation. Afflicted with
miseries at home, one may put on the ochre cloth of a monk; but that
renunciation doesn\'t last long. Again, a man out of work puts on an
ochre wearing-cloth and goes off to Benares. After three months he
writes home: \'I have a job here. I shall come home in a few days.
Don\'t worry about me.\' Again, a man may have everything he wants. He
lacks nothing, yet he does not enjoy his possessions. He weeps for God
alone. That is real renunciation.

\"No lie of any sort is good. A false garb, even though a holy one, is
not good. If the outer garb does not correspond to the inner thought, it
gradually brings ruin. Uttering false words or doing false deeds, one
gradually loses all fear. Far better is the white cloth of a
householder. Attachment to worldliness, occasional lapses from the
ideal, and an outer garb of gerrua- how dreadful!

\"It is not proper for a righteous person to tell a lie or do something
false even in a dramatic performance. Once I went to Keshab\'s house to
see the performance of a play called *Nava-Vrindāvan.* They brought

something on the stage which they called the \'Cross\'. Another actor
sprinkled water, which they said was the \'Water of Peace\'. I saw a
third actor staggering and reeling in the role of a drunkard.\"

A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"It was K-.\"

MASTER: \"It is not good for a devotee to play such parts. It is bad for
the mind to dwell on such subjects for a long while. The mind is like
white linen fresh from the laundry; it takes the colour in which you dip
it. If it is associated with falsehood for a long time, it will be
stained with falsehood.

\"Another day I went to Keshab\'s house to see the play called Nimai
Sannyas. Some flattering disciples of Keshab spoiled the whole
performance.

One of them said to Keshab, \'You are the Chaitanya of the Kaliyuga.\'
Keshab pointed to me and asked with a smile, \'Then who is he?\' I
replied: \'Why, I am the servant of your servant. I am a speck of the
dust of your feet.\' Keshab had a desire for name and fame.

(To Amrita and Trailokya) \"Youngsters like Narendra and Rakhal are
ever-perfect. Every time they are born they are devoted to God. An
ordinary man acquires a little devotion after austerities and a hard
struggle. But these boys have love of God from the very moment of their
birth. They are like the natural image of Śiva, which springs forth from
the earth and is not set up by human hands.

**Nature of the ever-perfect**

\"The ever-perfect form a class by themselves. Not all birds have
crooked beaks. The ever-perfect are never attached to the world. There
is the instance of Prahlada.

\"Ordinary people practise spiritual discipline and cultivate devotion
to God; but they also become attached to the world and are caught in the
glamour of \'woman and gold\'. They are like flies, which sit on a
flower or a sweetmeat and light on filth as well.

\"But the ever-perfect are like bees, which light only on flowers and
sip the honey. The ever-perfect drink only the Nectar of Divine Bliss.
They are never inclined to worldly pleasures.

\"The devotion of the ever-perfect is not like the ordinary devotion
that one acquires as a result of strenuous spiritual discipline.
Ritualistic devotion consists in repeating the name of God and
performing worship in a prescribed manner. It is like crossing a
rice-field in a roundabout way along the balk. Again, it is like
reaching a near-by village by boat in a roundabout way along a winding
river.

\"One does not follow the injunctions of ceremonial worship when one
develops raga-bhakti, when one loves God as one\'s own. Then it is like
crossing a rice-field after the harvest. You don\'t have to walk along
the balk. You can go straight across the field in any direction.

\"When the country is flooded deep with water, one doesn\'t have to
follow the winding river. Then the fields are deep under water. You can
row your boat straight to the village.

\"Without this intense attachment, this passionate love, one cannot
realize God.\"

**Master\'s experiences in samādhi**

AMRITA: \"Sir, how do you feel in samādhi?\"

MASTER: \"You may have heard that the cockroach, by intently meditating
on the Bhramara, is transformed into a Bhramara. Do you know how I feel
then? I feel like a fish released from a pot into the water of the
Ganges.\"

AMRITA: \"Don\'t you feel at that time even a trace of ego?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, generally a little of it remains. However hard you may
rub a grain of gold against a grindstone, still a bit of it always
remains. Or again, take the case of a big fire; the ego is like one of
its sparks. In samādhi I lose outer consciousness completely; but God
generally keeps a little trace of ego in me for the enjoyment of divine
communion. Enjoyment is possible only when \'I\' and \'you\' remain.

\"Again, sometimes God effaces even that trace of \'I\'. Then one
experiences jada samādhi or nirvikalpa samādhi. That experience cannot
be described. A salt doll went to measure the depth of the ocean, but
before it had gone far into the water it melted away. It became entirely
one with the water of the ocean. Then who was to come back and tell the
ocean\'s depth?\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 9**

ADVICE TO THE BRAHMOS

> Saturday, April 7, 1883

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was visiting Balarām in Calcutta, with Narendra,
Bhavanath, Rākhāl , M., and others. Balarām, at the Master\'s bidding,
had invited some of the young devotees to lunch. Sri Ramakrishna often
said to him, \"Feed them now and then; that will confer on you the merit
of feeding holy men.\" The Master looked on his young disciples, yet
untouched by \"woman and gold\", as veritable embodiments of God.

A few days earlier Sri Ramakrishna had been to performance of the play
entitled Nava-Vrindāvan. Keshab had played the role of Pavhari Baba.

> Keshab\'s house with Narendra and Rākhāl to see a

Narendra had taken part in the performance, in which

MASTER: \"Keshab came on the stage in the role of a holy man and
sprinkled the \'Water of Peace\'. But I didn\'t like it. The idea of
sprinkling such water on a theatrical stage after a performance!

\"Another gentleman played the part of Sin. That is not good either. One
should not commit sin; one should not even feign it.\"

**Narendra\'s music**

The Master wanted to hear Narendra sing. The young disciple was not
feeling well, but at the Master\'s earnest request he sang to the
accompaniment of the Tānpura:

> *Sing, O bird that nestles deep within my heart!*
>
> *Sing, O bird that sits on the Kalpa-Tree of Brahman!*
>
> *Sing God\'s everlasting praise. . . .*

Then he sang:

> *Brahman, Joy of the whole universe, Supreme Effulgence; God
> beginningless, Lord of the world, the very Life of life! . . .*

And again:

> *O King of Kings, reveal Thyself to me!*
>
> *I crave Thy mercy. Cast on me Thy glance!*
>
> *At Thy dear feet I dedicate my life,*
>
> *Seared in the fiery furnace of this world.*
>
> *My heart, alas, is deeply stained with sin;*
>
> *Ensnared in maya, I am all but dead.*
>
> *Compassionate Lord! Revive my fainting soul*
>
> *With the life-giving nectar of Thy grace.*

Narendra continued:

> *Upon the tray of the sky blaze bright*
>
> *The lamps of Sun and moon;*
>
> *Like diamonds shine the glittering stars*
>
> *To deck Thy wondrous form.*
>
> *The sweet Malaya breeze blows soft,*
>
> *For fragrant incense smoke;*
>
> *The moving air sways to and fro*
>
> *The fan before Thy holy face:*
>
> *Like gleaming votive lights*
>
> *The fresh and flowery groves appear.*
>
> *How wonderful Thy worship is,*
>
> *O Slayer of birth and death!*
>
> *The sacred Om, from space arisen,*
>
> *Is the resounding drum.*
>
> *My mind craves nectar day and night*
>
> *At Hari\'s Lotus Feet;*
>
> *Oh, shower the waters of Thy grace*
>
> *On thirsty Nanak, blessed Lord;*
>
> *And may Thy hallowed name*
>
> *Become his everlasting home!*

He sang again:

> *In Wisdom\'s firmament the moon of Love is rising full,*
>
> *And Love\'s flood-tide, in surging waves, is flowing everywhere.*
>
> *O Lord, how full of bliss Thou art! Victory unto Thee! . . .*

Then at the Master\'s bidding Bhavanath sang:

> *Where is a friend like Thee, O Essence of Mercy?*
>
> *Where is another friend like Thee*
>
> *To stand by me through pain and pleasure?*
>
> *Who, among all my friends, forgives my failings,*
>
> *Bringing me comfort for my grief,*
>
> *Soothing my spirit in its terror?*
>
> *Thou art the Helmsman who dost steer life\'s craft*
>
> *Across the world\'s perilous sea;*
>
> *Thy grace it is alone, O Lord,*
>
> *That silences my raging passions\' storm.*
>
> *Thou pourest out the waters of peace*
>
> *Upon my burning, penitent soul:*
>
> *And Thine is the bosom that will shelter me*
>
> *When every other friend I own*
>
> *Deserts me in my dying hour.*

**True renunciation**

Narendra said to the Master with a smile, referring to Bhavanath, \"He
has given up fish and betel-leaf.\" MASTER: \"Why so? What is the matter
with fish and betel-leaf? They aren\'t harmful. The renunciation of
\'woman and gold\' is the true renunciation.

\"Where is Rākhāl ?\"

A DEVOTEE: \"He is asleep, sir.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Once a man went to a certain place to see a
theatrical performance, carrying a mat under his arm. Hearing that it
would be some time before the performance began, he spread the mat on
the floor and fell asleep. When he woke up it was all over. (All laugh.)
Then he returned home with the mat under his arm.\"

Ramdayal was very ill and lay in bed in another room. The Master went
there to inquire about him.

About four o\'clock in the afternoon some members of the Brahmo Samaj
arrived. The Master began to converse with them.

Study of scriptures for the beginner

A BRAHMO: \"Sir, have you read the Panchadasi?\"

MASTER: \"At first one should hear books like that and indulge in
reasoning. But later on-

> *Cherish my precious Mother Syama*
>
> *Tenderly within, O mind;*
>
> *May you and I alone behold Her,*
>
> *Letting no one else intrude.*

\"One should hear the scriptures during the early stages of spiritual
discipline. After attaining God there is no lack of knowledge. Then the
Divine Mother supplies it without fail.

\"A child spells out every word as he writes, but later on he writes
fluently.

\"The goldsmith is up and doing while melting gold. As long as the gold
hasn\'t melted, he works the bellows with one hand, moves the fan with
the other, and blows through a pipe with his mouth. But the moment the
gold melts and is poured into the mould, he is relieved of all anxiety.

\"Mere reading of the scriptures is not enough. A person cannot
understand the true significance of the scriptures if he is attached to
the world.Though with intense delight I learnt many poems and dramas,I
have forgotten them all, entrapped in Krishna\'s love.

\"Keshab enjoys the world and practises yoga as well. Living in the
world, he directs his mind to God.\"

A devotee described the Convocation of Calcutta University, saying that
the meeting looked like a forest of human heads.

MASTER: \"The feeling of the Divine is awakened in me when I see a great
crowd of people. Had I seen that meeting, I should have been overwhelmed
with spiritual fervour.\"

**Sunday, April 8, 1883**

It was Sunday morning. The Master, looking like a boy, was seated in his
room, and near him was another boy, his beloved disciple Rākhāl .
M.entered and saluted the Master. Ramlal also was in the room, and
Kishori, Manilal Mallick, and several other devotees gathered by and by.

Manilal Mallick, a business man, had recently been to Benares, where he
owned a bungalow.

**Trailanga Swami and Bhāskarānanda**

MASTER: \"So you have been to Benares. Did you see any holy men there?\"

MANILAL: \"Yes, sir. I paid my respects to Trailanga Swami,
Bhaskarananda, and others.\"

MASTER: \"Tell us something about them.\"

MANILAL: \"Trailanga Swami is living in the same temple where he lived
before-on the Manikarnika Ghat; near the Benimadhav Minaret. People say
he was formerly in a more exalted spiritual state. He could perform many
miracles. Now he has lost much of that power.\"

MASTER: \"That is the criticism of worldly people.\"

MANILAL: \"Trailanga Swami keeps a strict vow of silence. Unlike him,
Bhaskarananda is friendly with all.\"

MASTER: \"Did you have any conversation with Bhaskarananda?\"

MANILAL: \"Yes, sir. We had a long talk. Among other things we discussed
the problem of good and evil. He

said to me: \'Don\'t follow the path of evil. Give up sinful thoughts.
That is how God wants us to act. Perform only those duties that are
virtuous.\' \"

**The seer of God transcends good and evil**

MASTER: \"Yes, that is also a path, meant for worldly-minded people. But
those whose spiritual consciousness has been awakened, who have realized
that God alone is real and all else illusory, cherish a different ideal.
They are aware that God alone is the Doer and others are His
instruments.

\"Those whose spiritual consciousness has been awakened never make a
false step. They do not have to reason in order to shun evil. They are
so full of love of God that whatever action they undertake is a good
action. They are fully conscious that they are not the doers of their
actions, but mere servants of God. They always feel: \'I am the machine
and He is the Operator. I do as He does through me. I speak as He speaks
through me. I move as He moves me.\'

\"Fully awakened souls are beyond virtue and vice. They realize that it
is God who does everything.

**Seeing God in everything**

\"There was a monastery in a certain place. The monks residing there
went out daily to beg their food. One day a monk, while out for his
alms, saw a landlord beating a man mercilessly. The compassionate monk
stepped in and asked the landlord to stop. But the landlord was filled
with anger and turned his wrath against the innocent monk. He beat the
monk till he fell unconscious on the ground. Someone reported the matter
to the monastery. The monks ran to the spot and found their brother
lying there. Four or five of them carried him back and laid him on a
bed. He was still unconscious. The other monks sat around him sad at
heart; some were fanning him. Finally someone suggested that he should
be given a little milk to drink. When it was poured into his mouth he
regained consciousness. He opened his eyes and looked around. One of the
monks said, \'Let us see whether he is fully conscious and can recognize
us.\' Shouting into his ear, he said, \'Revered sir, who is giving you
milk?\' \'Brother,\' replied the holy man in a low voice, \'He who beat
me is now giving me milk.\'

\"But one does not attain such a state of mind without the realization
of God.\"

MANILAL: \"Sir, what you have just said applies to a man of a very lofty
spiritual state. I talked on such topics in a general way with
Bhaskarananda.\"

MASTER: \"Does he live in a house?\"

MANILAL: \"Yes, sir. He lives with a devotee.\"

MASTER: \"How old is he now?\"

MANILAL: \"About fifty-five.\"

MASTER: \"Did you talk about anything else?\"

MANILAL: \"I asked him how to cultivate bhakti. He said: \'Chant the
name of God. Repeat the name of Rāma.\' \"

MASTER: \"That is very good.\"

The worship was over in the temples and the bells rang for the food
offerings in the shrines. As it was a summer noon the sun was very hot.
The flood-tide began in the Ganges and a breeze came up from the south.
Sri Ramakrishna was resting in his room after his meal.

The people of Basirhat, Rākhāl \'s birth-place, had been suffering from
a severe drought during the summer months.

MASTER (to Manilal): \"Rākhāl says that the people in his native village
have been suffering seriously from a scarcity of water. Why don\'t you
build a reservoir there? That will do the people good. (Smiling) You
have so much money; what will you do with all your wealth? But they say
that telis are very calculating.\" (All laugh.)

Manilal was truly a calculating man, though he suffered no lack of
money. In later years he set up an endowment of twenty-five thousand
rupees for the maintenance of poor students.

Manilal made no answer to these words of the Master about his caste
characteristics. Later on, in the course of the conversation, he
remarked casually: \"Sir, you referred to a reservoir. You might as well
have confined yourself to that suggestion. Why allude to the \'oil-man
caste\' and all that?\"

Some of the devotees smiled to themselves. The Master laughed.

Presently a few elderly members of the Brahmo Samaj arrived. The room
was full of devotees. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on his bed, facing the
north. He kept smiling, and talked to the Brahmo devotees in a joyous
mood.

**Characteristics of divine love**

MASTER: \"You talk glibly about prema. But is it such a commonplace
thing? There are two characteristics of prema. First, it makes one
forget the world. So intense is one\'s love of God that one becomes
unconscious of outer things. Chaitanya had this ecstatic love; he \'took
a wood for the sacred grove of Vrindāvan and the ocean for the dark
waters of the Jamuna\'. Second, one has no feeling of \'my-ness\' toward
the body, which is so dear to man. One wholly gets rid of the feeling
that the body is the soul.

**Indications of God-realization**

\"There are certain signs of God-realization. The man in whom longing
for God manifests its glories is not far from attaining Him. What are
the glories of that longing? They are discrimination, dispassion,
compassion for living beings, serving holy men, loving their company,
chanting the name and glories of God, telling the truth, and the like.
When you see those signs of longing in an aspirant, you can rightly say
that for him the vision of God is not far to seek.

\"The state of a servant\'s house will tell you unmistakably whether his
master has decided to visit it. First, the rubbish and jungle around the
house are cleared up. Second, the soot and dirt are removed from the
rooms. Third, the courtyard, floors, and other places are swept clean.
Finally the master himself sends various things to the house such as a
carpet, a hubble-bubble for smoking, and the like. When you see these
things arriving, you conclude that the master will very soon come\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, should one first practise discrimination to attain
self-control?\"

MASTER: \"That is also a path. It is called the path of vichara,
reasoning. But the inner organs3 are brought under control naturally
through the path of devotion as well. It is rather easily accomplished
that way. Sense pleasures appear more and more tasteless as love for God
grows. Can carnal pleasure attract a grief-stricken man and woman the
day their child has died?\"

**Efficacy of japa and prayer**

DEVOTEE: \"How can I develop love for God?\"

MASTER: \"Repeat His name, and sins will disappear. Thus you will
destroy lust, anger, the desire for creature comforts, and so on.\"

DEVOTEE: \"How can I take delight in God\'s name?\"

MASTER: \"Pray to God with a yearning heart that you may take delight in
His name. He will certainly fulfil

your heart\'s desire.\"

So saying, the Master sang a song in his sweet voice, pleading with the
Divine Mother to show Her grace to suffering men:

> *O Mother, I have no one else to blame:*
>
> *Alas! I sink in the well these very hands have dug.*
>
> *With the six passions for my spade,*
>
> *I dug a pit in the sacred land of earth;*
>
> *And now the dark water of death gushes forth!*
>
> *How can I save myself, O my Redeemer?*
>
> *Surely I have been my own enemy;*
>
> *How can I now ward off this dark water of death?*
>
> *Behold, the waters rise to my chest!*
>
> *How can I save myself? O Mother, save me!*
>
> *Thou art my only Refuge; with Thy protecting glance*
>
> *Take me across to the other shore of the world.*

The Master sang again:

> *What a delirious fever is this that I suffer from!*
>
> *O Mother, Thy grace is my only cure.*
>
> *False pride is the fever that racks my wasted form;*
>
> *\"I\" and \"mine\" are my cry. Oh, what a wicked delusion!*
>
> *My quenchless thirst for wealth and friends is never-ceasing; How,
> then, shall I sustain my life?*
>
> *Talk about things unreal, this is my wretched delirium,*
>
> *And I indulge in it always, O Giver of all good fortune!*
>
> *My eyes in seeming sleep are closed, my stomach is filled*
>
> *With the vile worms of cruelty.*
>
> *Alas! I wander about absorbed in unmeaning deeds;*
>
> *Even for Thy holy name I have no taste, O Mother!*
>
> *I doubt that I shall ever be cured of this malady.*

Then the Master said: \" \'Even for Thy holy name I have no taste.\' A
typhoid patient has very little chance of recovery if he loses all taste
for food; but his life need not be despaired of if he enjoys food even a
little. That is why one should cultivate a taste for God\'s name. Any
name will do-Durga, Krishna, or Śiva. Then if, through the chanting of
the name, one\'s attachment to God grows day by day, and joy fills the
soul, one has nothing to fear. The delirium will certainly disappear;
the grace of God will certainly descend.

**Parable of the two friends**

\'As is a man\'s feeling of love, so is his gain.\' Once two friends
were going along the street, when they saw some people listening to a
reading of the Bhagavata. \'Come, friend\', said the one to the other.
\'Let us hear the sacred book.\' So saying he went in and sat down. The
second man peeped in and went away. He entered a house of ill fame. But
very soon he felt disgusted with the place. \'Shame on me!\' he said to
himself. \'My friend has been listening to the sacred word of Hari; and
see where I am!\' But the friend who had been listening to the Bhagavata
also became disgusted. \'What a fool I am!\' he said. \'I have been
listening to this fellow\'s blah-blah, and my friend is having a grand
time.\' In course of time they both died. The messenger of Death came
for the soul of the one who had listened to the Bhagavata and dragged it
off to hell. The messenger of God came for the soul of the one who had
been to the house of prostitution and led it up to heaven.

\"Verily, the Lord looks into a man\'s heart and does not judge him by
what he does or where he lives. \'Krishna

accepts a devotee\'s inner feeling of love.\'

\"In the Kartabhaja sect, the teacher, while giving initiation, says to
the disciple, \'Now everything depends on your mind.\' According to this
sect, \'He who has the right mind find the right way and also achieves
the right end.\' It was through the power of his mind that Hanuman leapt
over the sea. \'I am the servant of Rāma; I have repeated the holy name
of Rāma. Is there anything impossible for me?\'-that was Hanuman\'s
faith.

\"Ignorance lasts as long as one has ego. There can be no liberation so
long as the ego remains. \'O God, Thou art the Doer and not I\'-that is
knowledge.

\"By being lowly one can rise high. The chatak bird makes its nest on
low ground, but it soars very high in the sky. Cultivation is not
possible on high land; in low land water accumulates and makes
cultivation possible.

\"One must take the trouble to seek the company of holy persons. In his
own home a man hears only worldly talk; the disease of worldliness has
become chronic with him. The caged parrot sitting on its perch repeats,
\'Rāma! Rāma!\' But let it fly to the forest and it will squawk in its
usual way.

\"Mere possession of money doesn\'t make a nobleman. One sign of the
mansion of a nobleman is that all the rooms are lighted. The poor cannot
afford much oil, and consequently cannot have so many lights. This
shrine of the body should not be left dark; one should illumine it with
the lamp of Wisdom. Lighting the lamp of knowledge in the chamber of
your heart, Behold the face of the Mother, Brahman\'s Embodiment.

\"Everyone can attain Knowledge. There are two entities: Jivatma, the
individual soul, and Paramatma, the Supreme Soul. Through prayer all
individual souls can be united to the Supreme Soul. Every house has a
connection for gas, and gas can be obtained from the main storage-tank
of the Gas Company. Apply to the Company, and it will arrange for your
supply of gas. Then your house will be lighted.

\"In some people spiritual consciousness has already been awakened; but
they have special marks. They do not enjoy hearing or talking about
anything but God. They are like the chatak, which prays for rain-water
though the seven oceans, the Ganges, the Jamuna, and the rivers near it
are all filled with water. It won\'t drink anything but rain-water, even
though its throat is burning with thirst.\"

The Master wanted to hear a few songs. Ramlal and a brahmin official of
the temple garden sang:

> *Dwell, O Lord, O Lover of bhakti,*
>
> *In the Vrindāvan of my heart,*
>
> *And my devotion unto Thee*
>
> *Will be Thy Radha, dearly loved. . . .*

And again:

> *The dark cloud of the summer storm fades into nothingness,*
>
> *When, flute in hand and a smile on His lips,*
>
> *Lighting the world with His loveliness,*
>
> *Krishna, the Dark One, appears.*
>
> *His dazzling yellow robe outgleams even the lightning\'s glare;*

23. *wreath of wild-flowers interwoven Gently swings from His youthful
    > breast And softly kisses His feet.*

> *See, there He stands, the Lord of life, the Moon of Nanda\'s line,*
>
> *Outshining all the moons in heaven*
>
> *And with the splendour of His rays*
>
> *Flooding the Jamuna\'s bank!*
>
> *He stands there, stealing the maidens\' hearts;*
>
> *He lures them from hearth and home.*
>
> *Krishna enters my own heart\'s shrine,*
>
> *And with His flute-note steals away*
>
> *My wisdom, life, and soul.*
>
> *To whom shall Ganga Narayana pour out his tale of woe?*
>
> *Ah, friend, you might have understood*
>
> *Had you but gone to the Jamuna\'s bank*
>
> *To fill your water-jar!*

Again they sang:

> *High in the heaven of the Mother\'s feet, my mind was soaring like a
> kite,*
>
> *When came a blast of sin\'s rough wind that drove it swiftly toward
> the earth. . . .*

**Zeal for the Lord destroys sin**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"As the tiger devours other animals, so does
the \'tiger of zeal for the Lord\' eat up lust, anger, and the other
passions. Once this zeal grows in the heart, lust and the other passions
disappear. The gopis of Vrindāvan had that state of mind because of
their zeal for Krishna.

\"Again, this zeal for God is compared to collyrium. Radha said to her
friends, \'I see Krishna everywhere.\' They replied, \'Friend, you have
painted your eyes with the collyrium of love; that is why you see
Krishna everywhere.\'

\"They say that when your eyes are painted with collyrium made from the
ashes of a frog\'s head you see snakes everywhere.

**Traits of bound souls**

\"They are indeed bound souls who constantly dwell with \'woman and
gold\' and do not think of God even for a moment. How can you expect
noble deeds of them? They are like mangoes pecked by a crow, which may
not be offered to the Deity in the temple, and which even men hesitate
to eat.

\"Bound souls, worldly people, are like silk-worms. The worms can cut
through their cocoons if they want, but having woven the cocoons
themselves, they are too much attached to them to leave them. And so
they die there.

\"Free souls are not under the control of \'woman and gold\'. There are
some silk-worms that cut through the cocoon they have made with such
great care. But they are few and far between.

\"It is maya that deludes. Only a few become spiritually awakened and
are not deluded by the spell of maya.

They do not come under the control of \'woman and gold\'.

**Two classes of perfect souls**

\"There are two classes of perfect souls: those who attain perfection
through spiritual practice, and those who attain it through the grace of
God. Some farmers irrigate their fields with great labour. Only then can
they grow crops. But there are some who do not have to irrigate at all;
their fields are flooded by rain. They don\'t have to go to the trouble
of drawing water. One must practise spiritual discipline laboriously, in
order to avoid the clutches of maya. Those who attain liberation through
the grace of God do not have to labour. But they are few indeed.

**The ever-perfect**

\"Then there is the class of the ever-perfect. They are born in each
life with their spiritual consciousness already awakened. Think of a
spring whose outlet is obstructed. While looking after various things in
the garden, the plumber accidentally clears it and the water gushes out.
Yet people are amazed to see the first

manifestations of an ever-perfect soul\'s zeal for God. They say,
\'Where was all this devotion and renunciation and love?\'\"

The conversation turned to the spiritual zeal of devotees, as
illustrated in the earnestness of the gopis of

Vrindāvan. Ramlal sang:

> *Thou art my All in All, O Lord!-the Life of my life, the Essence of
> essence;*
>
> *In the three worlds I have none else but Thee to call my own.*
>
> *Thou art my peace, my joy, my hope; Thou my support, my wealth, my
> glory;*
>
> *Thou my wisdom and my strength.*
>
> *Thou art my home, my place of rest; my dearest friend, my next of
> kin;*
>
> *My present and my future, Thou; my heaven and my salvation.*
>
> *Thou art my scriptures, my commandments; Thou art my ever gracious
> Guru;*
>
> *Thou the Spring of my boundless bliss.*
>
> *Thou art the Way, and Thou the Goal; Thou the Adorable One, O Lord!*
>
> *Thou art the Mother tender-hearted; Thou the chastising Father;*
>
> *Thou the Creator and Protector; Thou the Helmsman who dost steer*
>
> *My craft across the sea of life.*

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Ah! What a beautiful song!-\'Thou art my All
in All.\' \"

Ramlal sang again, this time describing the pangs of the gopis on being
separated from their beloved Krishna:

> *Hold not, hold not the chariot\'s wheels!*
>
> *Is it the wheels that make it move?*
>
> *The Mover of its wheels is Krishna,*
>
> *By whose will the worlds are moved. . . .*

The Master went into deep samādhi. His body was motionless; he sat with
folded hands as in his photograph. Tears of joy flowed from the corners
of his eyes. After a long time his mind came down to the ordinary plane
of consciousness. He mumbled something, of which only a word now and
then could be heard by the devotees in the room. He was saying: \"Thou
art I, and I am Thou-Thou eatest-Thou-I eat! . . . What is this
confusion Thou hast created?\"

> Continuing, the Master said: \"I see everything like a man with
> jaundiced eyes! I see Thee alone everywhere. O Krishna, Friend of the
> lowly! O Eternal Consort of my soul! O Govinda!\"

As he uttered the words \"Eternal Consort of my soul\" and \"Govinda\",
the Master again went into samādhi. There was complete silence in the
room. The eager and unsatiated eyes of the devotees were fixed on the
Master, a God-man of infinite moods.

Adhar Sen arrived with several of his friends. He was a deputy
magistrate, about thirty years old. This was his second visit to the
Master. He was accompanied by his friend Saradacharan, who was extremely
unhappy because of the death of his eldest son. A retired deputy
inspector of schools, Saradacharan devoted himself to meditation and
prayer. Adhar had brought his friend to the Master for consolation in
his afflicted state of mind.

Coming down from samādhi, the Master found the eyes of the devotees
fixed on him. He muttered to himself, still in an abstracted mood.

**Worldly people's lack perseverance**

Then, addressing the devotees, Sri Ramakrishna said: \"The spiritual
wisdom of worldly people is seen only on rare occasions. It is like the
flame of a candle. No, it is rather like a single ray of the sun passing
through a chink in a wall. Worldly people chant the name of God, but
there is no zeal behind it. It is like children\'s

swearing by God, having learnt the word from the quarrels of their
aunts.

\"Worldly people have no grit. If they succeed in an undertaking, it is
all right, but if they don\'t succeed, it scarcely bothers them at all.
When they need water, they begin to dig a well. But as soon as they
strike a stone, they give up digging there and begin at another place.
Perhaps they come to a bed of sand. Finding nothing but sand, they give
that place up too. How can they succeed in getting water unless they
continue to dig persistently where they started?

\"Man reaps the harvest of his own past actions. Hence you read in the
song:

> *O Mother, I have no one else to blame:*
>
> *Alas! I sink in the well these very hands have dug.*

5888. \'I\' and \'mine\'-that is ignorance. By discriminating you will
      realize that what you call \'I\' is really nothing but Ātman.
      Reason it out. Are you the body or the flesh or something else? At
      the end you will know that you are none of these. You are free
      from attributes. Then you will realize that you have never been
      the doer of any action, that you have been free from virtue and
      faults alike, that you are beyond righteousness and
      unrighteousness.

\"From ignorance a man says, \'This is gold and this is brass.\' But a
man of Knowledge says, \'It is all gold.\'

\"Reasoning stops when one sees God. But there are instances of people
who have realized God and who still continue to reason. Again, there are
people who, even after having seen God, chant His name with devotion and
sing His glories.

\"How long does a child cry? So long as it is not sucking at its
mother\'s breast. As soon as it is nursed it stops crying. Then the
child feels only joy. Joyously it drinks the milk from its mother\'s
breast. But it is also true that, while drinking, the child sometimes
plays and laughs.

\"It is God alone who has become everything. But in man He manifests
Himself the most. God is directly present in the man who has the pure
heart of a child and who laughs and cries and dances and sings in divine
ecstasy.\"

By this time Sri Ramakrishna had become better acquainted with Adhar,
who related the cause of his friend\'s grief. The Master sang, as if to
himself:

> *To arms! To arms, O man! Death storms your house in battle array!*
>
> *Bearing the quiver of knowledge, mount the chariot of devotion;*
>
> *Bend the bow of your tongue with the bow-string of love,*
>
> *And aim at him the shaft of Mother Kāli\'s holy name.*
>
> *Here is a ruse for the fray: You need no chariot or charioteer;*
>
> *Fight your foe from the Ganges\' bank, and he is easily slain.*

**Master consoles a bereaved father**

Then he said: \"What can you do? Be ready for Death. Death has entered
the house. You must fight him with

the weapon of God\'s holy name. God alone is the Doer. I say: \'O Lord,
I do as Thou doest through me. I speak as Thou speakest through me. I am
the machine and Thou art the Operator. I am the house and Thou art the
Indweller. I am the engine and Thou art the Engineer.\' Give your power
of attorney to God. One doesn\'t come to grief through letting a good
man assume one\'s responsibilities. Let His will be done.

\"But isn\'t your grief for your son only natural? The son is one\'s own
self reborn. Lakshmana ran to Ravana when the latter fell dead on the
battlefield. Looking at Ravana\'s body, he found that everyone of his
bones was full of holes. Thereupon he said to Rāma: \'O Rāma, glory be
to Your arrows! There is no spot in Ravana\'s body that they have not
pierced.\' \'Brother,\' replied Rāma, \'the holes you see in his bones
are not from My

arrows. Grief for his sons has pierced them through and through. These
holes are the marks of his grief. It has penetrated his very bones.\'

\"But house, wife, and children are all transitory; they have only a
momentary existence. The palm-tree alone is real. One or two fruits have
dropped off. Why lament?

\"God is engaged in three kinds of activity: creation, preservation, and
destruction. Death is inevitable. All will be destroyed at the time of
dissolution. Nothing will remain. At that time the Divine Mother will
gather up the seeds for the future creation, even as the elderly
mistress of the house keeps in her hotchpotch-pot little bags of
cucumber seeds, \'sea-foam\', blue pills, and other miscellaneous
things. The Divine Mother will take Her seeds out again at the time of
the new creation.\"

Sri Ramakrishna began to talk with Adhar on the verandah north of his
room.

MASTER (to Adhar): \"You are a deputy magistrate. Remember that you have
obtained your position through the grace of God. Do not forget Him, but
remember that all men must one day walk down the same path. We stay in
the world only a couple of days.

\"This world is our field of activity. We are born here to perform
certain duties. People have their homes in the country but come to
Calcutta to work.

\"It is necessary to do a certain amount of work. This is a kind of
discipline. But one must finish it speedily. While melting gold, the
goldsmith uses everything-the bellows, the fan, and the pipe-so that he
may have the hot fire he needs to melt the metal. After the melting is
over, he relaxes and asks his attendant to prepare a smoke for him. All
this time his face has been hot and perspiring; but now he can smoke.

\"One must have stern determination; then alone is spiritual practice
possible. One must make a firm resolve.

\"There is great power in the seed of God\'s name. It destroys
ignorance. A seed is tender, and the sprout soft; still it pierces the
hard ground. The ground breaks and makes way for the sprout.

\"The mind becomes very much distracted if one lives long in the midst
of \'woman and gold\'. Therefore one must be very careful. But monks do
not have much to fear. The real sannyasi lives away from \'woman and
gold\'. Therefore through the practice of spiritual discipline he can
always fix his mind on God.

\"True sannyasis, those who are able to devote their minds constantly to
God, are like bees, which light only on flowers and sip their honey.
Those who live in the world, in the midst of \'woman and gold\', may
direct their attention to God; but sometimes their minds dwell also on
\'woman and gold\'. They are like common flies, which light on a piece
of candy, then on a sore or filth.

\"Always keep your mind fixed on God. In the beginning you must struggle
a little; later on you will enjoy your pension.\"

**Sunday, April 15, 1883**

Surendra, a beloved lay disciple of the Master, had invited him to his
house on the auspicious occasion of the Annapurna Puja. It was about six
o\'clock when Sri Ramakrishna arrived there with some of his devotees.
The image of the Divine Mother had been installed in the worship hall.
At Her feet lay Hibiscus flowers and vilwa-leaves; from Her neck hung a
garland of flowers. Sri Ramakrishna entered the hall and bowed down
before the image. Then he went to the open courtyard, where he sat on a
carpet, surrounded by his devotees and disciples. A few bolsters lay on
the carpet, which was covered with a white linen sheet. He was asked to
lean against one of these, but he pushed it aside.

**Difficulty of overcoming vanity**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"To lean against a bolster! You see, it is
very difficult to give up vanity. You may

discriminate, saying that the ego is nothing at all; but still it comes,
nobody knows from where. A goat\'s legs jerk for a few moments even
after its head has been cut off. Or perhaps you are frightened in a
dream; you shake off sleep and are wide awake, but still you feel your
heart palpitating. Egotism is exactly like that. You may drive it away,
but still it appears from somewhere. Then you look sullen and say:
\'What! I have not been shown proper respect!\'\"

KEDĀR: \"One should be lowlier than a straw and patient as a tree.\"

MASTER: \"As for me, I consider myself as a speck of the dust of the
devotee\'s feet.\"

Vaidyanath arrived. He was a well-educated man, a lawyer of the High
Court of Calcutta. With folded hands he saluted the Master and took his
seat at one side.

SURENDRA (to the Master): \"He is one of my relatives.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, I see he has a nice nature.\"

SURENDRA: \"He has come here because he wants to ask you a question or
two.\"

**Different manifestations of divine power**

MASTER (to Vaidyanath): \"All that you see is the manifestation of
God\'s Power. No one can do anything without this Power. But you must
remember that there is not an equal manifestation of God\'s Power in all
things. Vidyasagar once asked me whether God endowed some with greater
power than others. I said to him: \'If there are no greater and lesser
manifestations of His Power, then why have we taken the trouble to visit
you? Have you grown two horns?\' So it stands to reason that God exists
in all beings as the All-pervasive Power; but the manifestations of His
Power are different in different beings.\"

**Free will and God\'s will**

VAIDYANATH: \"Sir, I have a doubt. People speak of free will. They say
that a man can do either good or evil according to his will. Is it true?
Are we really free to do whatever we like?\"

MASTER: \"Everything depends on the will of God. The world is His play.
He has created all these different things-great and small, strong and
weak, good and bad, virtuous and vicious. This is all His maya, His
sport. You must have observed that all the trees in a garden are not of
the same kind.

\"As long as a man has not realized God, he thinks he is free. It is God
Himself who keeps this error in man. Otherwise sin would have
multiplied. Man would not have been afraid of sin, and there would have
been no punishment for it.

\"But do you know the attitude of one who has realized God? He feels:
\'I am the machine, and Thou, O Lord, art the Operator. I am the house
and Thou art the Indweller. I am the chariot and Thou art the Driver. I
move as Thou movest me; I speak as Thou makest me speak.\'

(To Vaidyanath): \"It is not good to argue. Isn\'t that so?\"

VAIDYANATH: \"Yes, sir. The desire to argue disappears when a man
attains wisdom.\"

The Master, out of his stock of a dozen English words, said, \"Thank
you!\" in the most charming way, and all laughed.

MASTER (to Vaidyanath): \"You will make spiritual progress. People
don\'t trust a man when he speaks about God. Even if a great soul
affirms that he has seen God, still the average person will not accept
his words. He says to himself, \'If this man has really seen God, then
let him show Him to me.\' But can a man learn to feel a person\'s pulse
in one day? He must go about with a physician for many days; only then
can he distinguish the different pulses. He must be in the company of
those with whom the examination of the pulse has become a

regular profession.

\"Can anyone and everyone pick out a yarn of a particular count? If you
are in that trade, you can distinguish in a moment a forty-count thread
from a forty-one.\"

The kirtan was about to begin. Some Vaishnavas were seated on one side
with their mridangas and cymbals. A drummer began to play on his
instrument preparatory to the singing. The sweet and melodious sound of
the mridanga filled the courtyard, calling to mind the ecstatic kirtan
of Sri Gaurānga. The Master passed into a deep spiritual state. Now and
then he looked at the drummer and said, \"Ah! Ah! My hair is all
standing on end.\"

The singers asked what kind of song they should sing. The Master said
humbly, \"Something about Gaurānga, if you please.\"

The kirtan began. They sang about the celestial beauty of Sri Gaurānga:

> *The beauty of Gaurānga\'s face*
>
> *Glows brighter than the brightest gold;*
>
> *His smile illumines all the world.*
>
> *Who cares for even a million moons*
>
> *Shining in the blue autumn sky?*

The chief musician added improvised lines as they sang: \"O friend, his
face shines like the full moon!\" \"But it does not wane nor has it any
stain.\" \"It illumines the devotee\'s heart.\" Again he improvised:
\"His face is bathed with the essence of a million moons.\"

At these words the Master went into deep samādhi. After a short while he
regained consciousness of the sense world. Then he suddenly stood up,
overpowered by his spiritual mood, and sang improvised lines with the
professionals, thinking himself to be a milkmaid of Vrindāvan gone mad
with the beauty of Sri Krishna\'s form: \"Whose fault is it-my mind\'s
or His beauty\'s?\" \"In the three worlds I see nothing but my beloved
Krishna.\"

The Master danced and sang. All remained spellbound as they watched. The
chief musician sang the words of a gopi: \"O flute, pray stop. Can you
not go to sleep?\" One of the musicians added a new line: \"How can it
sleep? It rests on Krishna\'s lips.\"

The Master sat down. The music went on. They sang, assuming the mood of
Radha: \"My eyes are blinded. My ears are deaf. I have lost the power of
smell. All my senses are paralysed. But, alas, why am I left alone?\"

Finally the musicians sang of the union of Radha and Krishna:

> *Radha and Krishna are joined at last in the Nidhu Grove of
> Vrindāvan;*
>
> *Incomparable their beauty, and limitless their love!*
>
> *The one half shines like yellow gold, the other like bluest
> sapphire;*
>
> *Round the neck, on one side, a wild-flower garland hangs,*
>
> *And, on the other, there swings a necklace of precious gems.*
>
> *A ring of gold adorns one ear, a ring of shell the other;*
>
> *Half of the brow is bright as the blazing midday sun,*
>
> *The other softly gleams with the glow of the rising moon.*
>
> *Upon one half of the head a graceful peacock feather stands,*
>
> *And, from the other half, there hangs a braid of hair.*

As the music came to a close the Master said,
\"Bhagavata-Bhakta-Bhagavan\", and bowed low to the devotees seated on
all sides. He touched with his forehead the ground made holy by the
singing of the sacred music.

It was now about half past nine in the evening. Surendra entertained the
Master and the devotees with a sumptuous feast. When it was time to take
leave of their host, the Master, the devotees, and Surendra entered the
worship hall and stood before the image.

SURENDRA (to the Master): \"No one has sung anything about the Divine
Mother today.\"

MASTER (pointing to the image): \"Ah! Look at the beauty of the hall.
The light of the Divine Mother seems to have lighted the whole place.
Such a sight fills the heart with joy. Grief and desire for pleasure
disappear.

\"But can one not see God as formless Reality? Of course one can But not
if one has the slightest trace of worldliness. The. rishis of olden
times renounced everything and then contemplated Satchidananda, the
Indivisible Brahman.

\"The Brahmajnanis of modern times sing of God as \'immutable,
homogeneous\'.

seems as if the singers themselves don\'t enjoy the sweetness of God\'s
Bliss.

drink made with sugar candy if one is satisfied with mere coarse
treacle.

It sounds very dry to me. It One doesn\'t want a refreshing

\"Just see how happy you are, looking at this image of the Deity. But
those who always cry after the formless Reality do not get anything.
They realize nothing either inside or outside.\"

The Master sang a song to the Divine Mother:

> *O Mother, ever blissful as Thou art,*
>
> *Do not deprive Thy worthless child of bliss!*
>
> *My mind knows nothing but Thy Lotus Feet.*
>
> *The King of Death scowls at me terribly;*
>
> *Tell me, Mother, what shall I say to him?*
>
> *It was my heart\'s desire to sail my boat*
>
> *Across the ocean of this mortal life,*
>
> *O Durga, with Thy name upon my lips.*
>
> *I never dreamt that Thou wouldst drown me here*
>
> *In the dark waters of this shoreless sea.*
>
> *Both day and night I swim among its waves,*
>
> *Chanting Thy saving name; yet even so*
>
> *There is no end, O Mother, to my grief.*
>
> *If I am drowned this time, in such a plight,*
>
> *No one will ever chant Thy name again.*

Again he sang:

> *Repeat, O mind, my Mother Durga\'s hallowed name!*
>
> *Whoever treads the path, repeating \"Durga! Durga!\",*
>
> *Śiva Himself protects with His almighty trident.*
>
> *Thou art the day, O Mother! Thou art the dusk and the night.
> Sometimes Thou art man, and sometimes woman art Thou. Thou mayest even
> say to me: \"Step aside! Go away!\" Yet I shall cling to Thee, O
> Durga! Unto Thy feet*
>
> *As Thine anklets I shall cling, making their tinkling sound.*
>
> *Mother, when as the Kite Thou soarest in the sky,*
>
> *There, in the water beneath, as a minnow I shall be swimming;*
>
> *Upon me Thou wilt pounce, and pierce me through with Thy claws.*
>
> *Thus, when the breath of life forsakes me in Thy grip,*
>
> *Do not deny me the shelter of Thy Lotus Feet!*

The Master saluted the divine image. As he came down the steps, he
called softly to Rākhāl : \"Where are my shoes? Are they missing?\"

As the Master got into the carriage, Surendra and the other devotees
bowed down before him. Then the carriage started for Dakshineswar. The
moon still lighted the streets.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 10**

THE MASTER WITH THE BRAHMO DEVOTEES (II)

> April 22, 1883

**Master\'s visit to Brahmo festival**

SRI RAMAKRISHNA paid a visit to Benimadhav Pal\'s garden house at
Sinthi, near Calcutta, on the occasion of the semi-annual festival of
the Brahmo Samaj. Many devotees of the Samaj were present and sat around
the Master. Now and then some of them asked him questions.

**Love and prayer**

A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"Sir, what is the way?\"

MASTER: \"Attachment to God, or, in other words, love for Him. And
secondly, prayer.\"

BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"Which one is the way-love or prayer?\"

MASTER: \"First love, and then prayer.\"

The Master sang:

> *Cry to your Mother Syama with a real cry, O mind!*
>
> *And how can She hold Herself from you?*
>
> *How can Syama stay away? . . .*

Continuing, the Master said: \"And one must always chant the name and
glories of God and pray to Him. An old metal pot must be scrubbed every
day. What is the use of cleaning it only once? Further, one must
practise discrimination and renunciation; one must be conscious of the
unreality of the world.\"

BRAHMO: \"Is it good to renounce the world?\"

MASTER: \"Not for all. Those who have not yet come to the end of their
enjoyments should not renounce the world. Can one get drunk on two
*ānnās*\' worth of wine?\"

**How to lead a householder\'s life**

BRAHMO: \"Then should they lead a worldly life?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, they should try to perform their duties in a detached
way. Before you break the jack-fruit open, rub your hands with oil, so
that the sticky milk will not smear them. The maidservant in a rich
man\'s house performs all her duties, but her mind dwells on her home in
the country. This is an example of doing duty in a detached way. You
should renounce the world only in mind. But a sannyasi should renounce
the world both inwardly and outwardly.\"

BRAHMO: \"What is the meaning of the \'end of enjoyments\'?\"

MASTER: \"I mean the enjoyment of \'woman and gold\'. It is risky to put
a typhoid patient in a room where pitchers of water and jugs of pickled
tamarind are kept. Most people don\'t feel any longing for God unless
they have once passed through the experience of wealth, name, fame,
creature comforts, and the like, that is to say, unless they have seen
through these enjoyments.\"

BRAHMO: \"Who is really bad, man or woman?\"

MASTER: \"As there are women endowed with vidyaŚakti, so also there are
women with avidyaŚakti. A woman endowed with spiritual attributes leads
a man to God, but a woman who is the embodiment of delusion makes him
forget God and drowns him in the ocean of worldliness.

\"This universe is created by the Mahamaya of God. Mahamaya contains
both Vidyā-māyā, the illusion of

knowledge, and Avidyā-māyā, the illusion of ignorance. Through the help
of Vidyā-māyā one cultivates such virtues as the taste for holy company,
knowledge, devotion, love, and renunciation. Avidyā-māyā consists of the
five elements and the objects of the five senses-form, flavour, smell,
touch, and sound. These make one forget God.\"

**Why there is evil in the world**

BRAHMO: \"If the power of avidyā is the cause of ignorance, then why has
God created it?\"

MASTER: \"That is His play. The glory of light cannot be appreciated
without darkness. Happiness cannot be understood without misery.
Knowledge of good is possible because of knowledge of evil.

\"Further, the mango grows and ripens on account of the covering skin.
You throwaway the skin when the mango is fully ripe and ready to be
eaten. It is possible for a man to attain gradually to the Knowledge of
Brahman because of the covering skin of maya. Maya in its aspects of
vidyā and avidyā may be likened to the skin of the mango. Both are
necessary.\"

BRAHMO: \"Sir, is it good to worship God with form, an image of the
Deity made of clay?\"

MASTER: \"You do not accept God with form. That is all right. The image
is not meant for you. For you it is good to deepen your feeling toward
your own Ideal. From the worshippers of the Personal God you should
learn their yearning-for instance, Sri Krishna\'s attraction for Radha.
You should learn from the worshippers of the Personal God their love for
their Chosen Ideal. When the believers in the Personal God worship the
images of Kāli and Durga, with what feeling they cry from the depths of
their souls, \'Mother! O Mother!\' How much they love the Deity! You
should accept that feeling. You don\'t have to accept the image.\"

BRAHMO: \"How does one cultivate the spirit of dispassion? Why don\'t
all attain it?\"

MASTER: \"Dispassion is not possible unless there is satiety through
enjoyment. You can easily cajole a small child with candies or toys. But
after eating the candies and finishing its play, it cries, \'I want to
go to my mother.\' Unless you take the child to its mother, it will
throw away the toy and scream at the top of its voice.\"

The members of the Brahmo Samaj are opposed to the traditional guru
system of orthodox Hinduism.

Therefore the Brahmo devotee asked the Master about it.

**The need of a guru**

BRAHMO: \"Is spiritual knowledge impossible without a guru?\"

MASTER: \"Satchidananda alone is the Guru. If a man in the form of a
guru awakens spiritual consciousness in you, then know for certain that
it is God the Absolute who has assumed that human form for your sake.
The guru is like a companion who leads you by the hand. After the
realization of God, one loses the distinction between the guru and the
disciple. \'That creates a very difficult situation; there the guru and
the disciple do not see each other.\' It was for this reason that Janaka
said to Sukadeva, \'Give me first my teacher\'s fee if you want me to
initiate you into the Knowledge of Brahman.\' For the distinction
between the teacher and the disciple ceases to exist after the disciple
attains to Brahman. The relationship between them remains as long as the
disciple does not see God.\"

It was dusk. Some of the Brahmo devotees said to the Master, \"Perhaps
it is time for your evening devotions.\"

MASTER: \"No, it isn\'t exactly that. One should pass through these
disciplines in the beginning. Later one doesn\'t need the rituals of
formal worship or to follow the injunctions.\"

After dusk the preacher of the Brahmo Samaj conducted the service from
the pulpit. The service was interspersed with recitations from the
Upanishads and the singing of Brahmo songs.

After the service the Master and the preacher conversed.

**Personal God and formless Deity**

MASTER: \"Well, it seems to me that both the formless Deity and God with
form are real. What do you say?\" PREACHER: \"Sir, I compare the
formless God to the electric current, which is not seen with the eyes
but can be felt.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, both are true. God with form is as real as God without
form. Do you know what describing God as being formless only is like? It
is like a man\'s playing only a monotone on his flute, though it has
seven holes. But on the same instrument another man plays different
melodies. Likewise, in how many ways the believers in a Personal God
enjoy Him! They enjoy Him through many different attitudes: the serene
attitude, the attitude of a servant, a friend, a mother, a husband, or a
lover.

\"You see, the thing is somehow or other to get into the Lake of the
Nectar of Immortality. Suppose one person gets into It by propitiating
the Deity with hymns and worship, and you are pushed into It. The result
will be the same. Both of you will certainly become immortal.

\"I give the Brahmos the illustration of water and ice. Satchidananda is
like an endless expanse of water. The water of the great ocean in cold
regions freezes into blocks of ice. Similarly, through the cooling
influence of divine love, Satchidananda assumes forms for the sake of
the bhaktas. The rishis had the vision of the supersensuous Spirit-form
and talked with It. But devotees acquire a \'love body\', and with its
help they see the Spirit-form of the Absolute.

\"It is also said in the Vedas that Brahman is beyond mind and words.
The heat of the sun of Knowledge melts the ice-like form of the Personal
God. On attaining the Knowledge of Brahman and communing with It in
nirvikalpa samādhi, one realizes Brahman, the Infinite, without form or
shape and beyond mind and words.

**God\'s true nature cannot be described**

\"The nature of Brahman cannot be described. About It one remains
silent. Who can explain the Infinite in words? However high a bird may
soar, there are regions higher still. What do you say?\"

PREACHER: \"Yes, sir, it is so stated in the Vedanta philosophy.\"

MASTER: \"Once a salt doll went to the ocean to measure its depth. But
it could not come back to give a report. According to one school of
thought, sages like Sukadeva saw and touched the Ocean of Brahman, but
did not plunge into It.

\"Once I said to Vidyasagar, \'Everything else but Brahman has been
polluted, as it were, like food touched by the tongue.\' In other words,
no one has been able to describe what Brahman is. A thing once uttered
by the tongue becomes polluted. Vidyasagar, great pundit though he was,
was highly pleased with my remarks.

\"It is said that there are places near Kedār that are covered with
eternal snow; he who climbs too high cannot come back. Those who have
tried to find out what there is in the higher regions, or what one feels
there, have not come back to tell us about it.

\"After having the vision of God man is overpowered with bliss. He
becomes silent. Who will speak? Who will explain?

\"The king lives beyond seven gates. At each gate sits a man endowed
with great power and glory. At each gate the visitor asks, \'Is this the
king?\' The gate-keeper answers, \'No. Not this, not this.\' The visitor
passes through the seventh gate and. becomes overpowered with joy. He is
speechless. This time he doesn\'t have to ask, \'Is this the king?\' The
mere sight of him removes all doubts.\"

PREACHER: \"Yes, sir, it is so described in Vedanta.\"

MASTER: \"When the Godhead is thought of as creating, preserving, and
destroying, It is known as the Personal God, Saguna Brahman, or the
Primal Energy, *Ādyāśakti*. Again, when It is thought of as beyond the
three gunas, then It is called the Attributeless Reality, Nirguna
Brahman, beyond speech and thought; this is the Supreme Brahman,
Parabrahman.

**The three gunas**

\"Under the spell of God\'s maya man forgets his true nature. He forgets
that he is heir to the infinite glories of his Father. This divine maya
is made up of three gunas. And all three are robbers; for they rob man
of all his treasures and make him forget his true nature. The three
gunas are sattva, rajas, and tamas. Of these, sattva alone points the
way to God. But even sattva cannot take a man to God.

**Parable of the three robbers**

\"Let me tell you a story. Once a rich man was passing through a forest,
when three robbers surrounded him and robbed him of all his wealth.
After snatching all his possessions from him, one of the robbers said:
\'What\'s the good of keeping the man alive? Kill him.\' Saying this, he
was about to strike their victim with his sword, when the second robber
interrupted and said: \'There\'s no use in killing him. Let us bind him
fast and leave him here. Then he won\'t be able to tell the police.\'
Accordingly the robbers tied him with a rope, left him, and went away.

\"After a while the third robber returned to the rich man and said:
\'Ah! You\'re badly hurt, aren\'t you? Come, I\'m going to release
you.\' The third robber set the man free and led him out of the forest.
When .they came near the highway, the robber said, \'Follow this road
and you will reach home easily.\' \'But you must come with me too\',
said the man. \'You have done so much for me. We shall all be happy to
see you at our home.\' \'No,\' said the robber, \'it is not possible for
me to go there. The police will arrest me.\' So saying, he left the rich
man after pointing out his way.

\"Now, the first robber, who said: \'What\'s the good of keeping the man
alive? Kill him\', is tamas. It destroys. The second robber is rajas,
which binds a man to the world and entangles him in a variety of
activities. Rajas makes him forget God. Sattva alone shows the way to
God. It produces virtues like compassion, righteousness, and devotion.
Again, sattva is like the last step of the stairs. Next to it is the
roof. The Supreme Brahman is man\'s own abode. One cannot attain the
Knowledge of Brahman unless one transcends the three gunas.\"

PREACHER: \"You have given us a fine talk, sir.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Do you know the nature of devotees? When one
devotee meets another, he says, \'Let me speak and you listen; and when
you speak I shall listen.\' You are a preacher and teach so many people!
You are a steamship, and I am a mere fishing-boat.\' (All laugh.)

**Wednesday, May 2, 1883**

About five o\'clock in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna arrived at the
temple of the Brahmo Samaj in Nandanbagan, accompanied by M., Rakhal,
and a few other devotees. At first the Master sat in the drawing-room on
the ground floor, where the Brahmo devotees gradually assembled.
Rabindranath Tagore and a few other members of the Tagore family were
present on this occasion.

Sri Ramakrishna was asked to go to the worship hall on the second floor.
A dais had been built on the eastern side of the room. There were a few
chairs and a piano in the hall. The Brahmo worship was to begin at dusk.

**Why temples are holy**

As soon as the Master entered the worship hall he bowed low before the
dais. Having taken his seat, he said to M. and the other devotees,
\"Narendra once asked me, \'What good is there in bowing before the
Brahmo Samaj temple?\' The sight of the temple recalls to my mind God
alone; then God-Consciousness is kindled in

my mind. God is present where people talk about Him. One feels there the
presence of all the holy places.

Places of worship recall God alone to my mind.

\"Once a devotee was overwhelmed with ecstasy at the sight of a
babla-tree. The idea flashed in his mind that the handle of the axe used
in the garden of the temple of Radhakanta was made from the wood of the
babla. Another devotee had such devotion for his guru that he would be
overwhelmed with divine feeling at the sight of his guru\'s neighbours.
Krishna-consciousness would be kindled in Radha\'s mind at the sight of
a cloud, a blue dress, or a painting of Krishna. She would become
restless and cry like a mad person, \'Krishna, where art Thou?\' \"

GHOSAL: \"But madness is not desirable.\"

MASTER: \"What do you mean? Was Radha\'s madness the madness that comes
from brooding over worldly objects and makes one unconscious? One
attains that madness by meditating on God. Haven\'t you heard of
love-madness and knowledge-madness?\"

A BRAHMO DEVOTEE: \"How can one realize God?\"

MASTER: \"By directing your love to Him and constantly reasoning that
God alone is real and the world illusory. The Aśwattha tree alone is
permanent; its fruit is transitory.\"

**How to spiritualize the passions**

BRAHMO: \"We have passions like anger and lust. What shall we do with
these?\"

MASTER: \"Direct the six passions to God. The impulse of lust should be
turned into the desire to have intercourse with Ātman. Feel angry at
those who stand in your way to God. Feel greedy for Him. If you must
have the feeling of I and Mine, then associate it with God. Say, for
instance, \'My Rama, my Krishna.\' If you must have pride, then feel
like Bibhishana, who said, \'I have touched the feet of Rama with my
head; I will not bow this head before anyone else.\'\"

**Responsibility for sins**

BRAHMO: \"If it is God that makes me do everything, then I am not
responsible for my sins.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Yes, Duryodhana also said that. \'O Krishna, I
do what Thou, seated in my heart, makest me do.\' If a man has the firm
conviction that God alone is the Doer and he is His instrument, then he
cannot do anything sinful. He who has learnt to dance correctly never
makes a false step. One cannot even believe in the existence of God
until one\'s heart becomes pure.\"

Sri Ramakrishna looked at the devotees assembled in the worship hall and
said: \"It is very good to gather in this way, now and then, and think
of God and sing His name and glories. But the worldly man\'s yearning
for God is momentary. It lasts as long as a drop of water on a red-hot
frying-pan.\"

**Brahmo worship**

The worship was about to begin, and the big hall was filled with Brahmo
devotees. Some of the Brahmo ladies sat on chairs, with music books in
their hands. The songs of the Brahmo Samaj were sung to the
accompaniment of harmonium and piano. Sri Ramakrishna\'s joy was
unbounded. The invocation was followed by a prayer, and then the worship
began. The acharyas, seated on the platform, recited from the Vedas:

Om. Thou art our Father. Give us right knowledge; do not destroy us! We
bow to Thee.

> *The Brahmo devotees chanted in chorus with the acharyas:*
>
> *Om. Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, Infinity.*
>
> *It shines as Bliss and Immortality.*
>
> *Brahman is Peace, Blessedness, and the One without a Second;*
>
> *It is pure and unstained by sin.*

The acharyas chanted in praise of God:

> *Om. O Reality, Cause of the Universe, we bow to Thee!*

Then the acharyas chanted their prayer together:

> *From the unreal lead us to the Real;*
>
> *From darkness lead us to Light;*
>
> *From death lead us to Immortality.*
>
> *Reach us through and through,*
>
> *O Rudra, and protect us evermore with Thy Compassionate Face.*

As Sri Ramakrishna heard these hymns, he went into a spiritual mood.
After this an Āchārya read a paper.

The worship was over. Most of the devotees went downstairs or to the
courtyard for fresh air while the refreshments were being made ready. It
was about nine o\'clock in the evening. The hosts were so engrossed with
the other invited guests that they forgot to pay any attention to Sri
Ramakrishna.

MASTER (to Rakhal and the other devotees): \"What\'s the matter? Nobody
is paying any attention to us!\"

RAKHAL (angrily): \"Sir, Let us leave here and go to Dakshineswar.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Keep quiet! The carriage hire is three rupees
and two *ānnās*. Who will pay that? Stubbornness won\'t get us anywhere.
You haven\'t a penny, and you are making these empty threats! Besides,
where shall we find food at this late hour of the night?\"

After a long time dinner was announced. The devotees were asked to take
their seats. The Master, with Rakhal and the others, followed the crowd
to the second floor. No room could be found for him inside the hall.
Finally, with great difficulty, a place was found for him in a dusty
corner. A brahmin woman served some curry, but Sri Ramakrishna could not
eat it. He ate luchi with salt and took some sweets.

There was no limit to the Master\'s kindness. The hosts were mere
youngsters; how could he be displeased with them, even though they did
not show him proper respect? Further, it would have been inauspicious
for the hollsehold if a holy man had left the place without taking food.
Finally the feast had been prepared in the name of God.

Sri Ramakrishna got into a carriage: but who was to pay the hire? The
hosts could not be found. Referring to this incident afterwards, the
Master said to the devotees, jokingly: \"The boys went to our hosts for
the carriage hire. First they were put out, but at last they managed to
get together three rupees. Our hosts refused to pay the extra two
*ānnās* and said, \'No, that will do.\' \"

**Sunday, May 13, 1883**

The Master paid a visit to the Hari-Bhakti-Pradayini-Sabha of
Kansharipara, in Calcutta, on the anniversary day of that religious
society. Kirtan and other forms of devotional music had been arranged
for the occasion. The songs centred round the Vrindāvan episode of Sri
Krishna\'s life. The theme was Radha\'s pique because of Sri Krishna\'s
having visited Chandravali, another of the gopis of Vrindāvan. Radha\'s
friends tried to console her and said to her: \"Why are you piqued? It
seems you are not thinking of Krishna\'s happiness, but only of your
own.\" Radha said to them: \"I am not angry at His going to
Chandravali\'s grove. But why should He go there? She doesn\'t know how
to take care of Him.\"

**May 20,1883**

The following Sunday a kirtan was arranged at the house of Ram, one of
the Master\'s householder devotees. Sri Ramakrishna graced the occasion
with his presence. The musicians sang about Radha\'s pangs at her
separation from Krishna:

Radha said to her friends: \"I have loved to see Krishna from my
childhood. My finger-nails are worn off from

counting the days on them till I shall see Him. Once He gave me a
garland. Look, it has withered, but I have not yet thrown it away. Alas!
Where has the Moon of Krishna risen now? Has that Moon gone away from my
firmament, afraid of the Rahu of my pique? Alas! Shall I ever see
Krishna again? O my beloved Krishna, I have never been able to look at
You to my heart\'s complete satisfaction. I have only one pair of eyes;
they blink and so hinder my vision. And further, on account of streams
of tears I could not see enough of my Beloved. The peacock feather on
the crown of His head shines like arrested lightning. The peacocks,
seeing Krishna\'s dark-cloud complexion, would dance in joy, spreading
their tails. O friends, I shall not be able to keep my life-breath.
After my death, place my body on a branch of the dark tamala tree and
inscribe on my body Krishna\'s sweet name.\"

The Master said: \"God and His name are identical; that is the reason
Radha said that. There is no difference between Rama and His holy
name.\"

**May 27, 1883**

Sri Ramakrishna was in his room at Dakshineswar, conversing with the
devotees. It was about nine o\'clock in the morning.

**Religious quarrels condemned**

MASTER (to M. and the other devotees): \"It is not good to harbour
malice. The Saktas, the Vaishnavas, and the Vedantists quarrel among
themselves. That is not wise. Padmalochan was court pundit of the
Maharaja of Burdwan. Once at a meeting the pundits were discussing
whether Śiva was superior to Brahma, or Brahma to Śiva. Padmalochan gave
an appropriate reply. \'I don\'t know anything about it\', said he. \'I
haven\'t talked either to Śiva or to Brahma.\'

**Single-minded devotion**

\"If people feel sincere longing, they will find that all paths lead to
God. But one should have nishtha, single-minded devotion. It is also
described as chaste and unswerving devotion to God. It is like a tree
with only one trunk shooting straight up. Promiscuous devotion is like a
tree with five branches.

Such was the single-minded devotion of the gopis to Krishna that they
didn\'t care to look at anyone but the Krishna they had seen at
Vrindāvan-the Shepherd Krishna, bedecked with a garland of yellow
wild-flowers and wearing a peacock feather on His crest. At the sight of
Krishna at Mathura with a turban on His head and dressed in royal robes,
the gopis pulled down their veils. They would not look at His face.
\'Who is this man?\' they said. \'Should we violate our chaste love for
Krishna by talking to him?\'

\"The devotion of the wife to her husband is also an instance of
unswerving love. She feeds her brothers-in-law as well, and looks after
their comforts, but she has a special relationship with her husband.
Likewise, one may have that single-minded devotion to one\'s own
religion; but one should not on that account hate other faiths. On the
contrary, one should have a friendly attitude, toward them.\"

The Master bathed in the Ganges and then went to the Kāli temple with M.
He sat before the image and offered flowers at the feet of the Divine
Mother. Now and then he put flowers on his own head and meditated.

After a long time he stood up. He was in a spiritual mood and danced
before the image, chanting the name of Kāli. Now and again he said: \"O
Mother! O Destroyer of suffering! O Remover of grief and agony!\" Was he
teaching people thus to pray to the Mother of the Universe with a
yearning heart, in order to get rid of the suffering inevitable in
physical life?

Sri Ramakrishna returned to his room and sat on the west porch. Rakhal,
M., Nakur Vaishnav, and other devotees were with him. Nakur had been
known to the Master for about twenty-five years. He was a devotee of
Gauranga and had a small shop which Sri Ramakrishna had often visited
when he first came to Calcutta from Kamarpukur.

Still overpowered with divine ecstasy, the Master sang:

> *O Kāli, my Mother full of Bliss! Enchantress of the almighty Śiva!*
>
> *In Thy delirious joy Thou dancest, clapping Thy hands together!*
>
> *Eternal One! Thou great First Cause, clothed in the form of the Void*
>
> *Thou wearest the moon upon Thy brow,*
>
> *Where didst Thou find Thy garland of heads before the universe was
> made?*
>
> *Thou art the Mover of all that move, and we are but Thy helpless
> toys;*
>
> *We move alone as Thou movest us and speak as through us Thou
> speakest.*
>
> *But worthless Kamalakanta says, fondly berating Thee:*
>
> *Confoundress! With Thy flashing sword*
>
> *Thoughtlessly Thou hast put to death my virtue and my sin alike!*

He sang again:

> *Mother, Thou art our sole Redeemer,*
>
> *Thou the Support of the three gunas,*
>
> *Higher than the most high.*
>
> *Thou art compassionate, I know,*
>
> *Who takest away our bitter grief.*
>
> *Sandhya art Thou, and Gayatri;*
>
> *Thou dost sustain this universe.*
>
> *Mother, the Help art Thou*
>
> *Of those that have no help but Thee,*
>
> *O Eternal Beloved of Śiva!*
>
> *Thou art in earth, in water Thou;*
>
> *Thou liest at the root of all.*
>
> *In me, in every creature,*
>
> *Thou hast Thy home; though clothed with form,*
>
> *Yet art Thou formless Reality.*

The Master sang a few more songs in praise of the Divine Mother. Then he
said to the devotees: \"It is not always best to tell householders about
the sorrows of life. They want bliss. Those who suffer from chronic
poverty can go without food for a day or two. But it is not wise to talk
about the sorrows and miseries of life to those who suffer if their food
is delayed a few minutes. Vaishnavcharan used to say: \'Why should one
constantly dwell on sin? Be merry!\' \"

While the Master was resting after his midday meal, Manohor Goswami, a
singer of kirtan, arrived. He sang about the ecstatic love of Gauranga
and the divine episode of Vrindāvan. The Master was absorbed in a deep
spiritual mood. He tore off his shirt and said, to the melody of the
kirtan, assuming the attitude of Radha: \"O Krishna, my Beloved! O
friends, bring Krishna to me. Then you will be real friends. Or take me
to Him, and I will be your slave for ever.\"

The musician sat spellbound at Sri Ramakrishna\'s ecstasy; then he said
with folded hands, \"Won\'t you please rid me of my worldliness?\"

MASTER: \"You are like the holy man who went about the city after first
finding a lodging. You are a sweet person and express many sweet
ideas.\"

MUSICIAN: \"Sir, I am like the bullock that only carries the bag of
sugar but cannot taste it. Alas, I myself do not enjoy the sweetness of
divine bliss.\"

The melodious music went on, and all were filled with joy.

**Saturday, June 2, 1883**

Sri Ramakrishna had been invited to visit the homes of his devotees
Balaram, Adhar, and Ram in Calcutta. Devotional music had been arranged
by Adhar and Ram. The Master was accompanied in the carriage by Rakhal,
M., and others.

As they drove along, Sri Ramakrishna said to the devotees: \"You see,
sin flies away when love of God grows in a man\'s heart, even as the
water of the reservoir dug in a meadow dries up under the heat of the
sun. But one cannot love God if one feels attracted to worldly things,
to \'woman and gold\'. Merely taking the vow of monastic life will not
help a man if he is attached to the world. It is like swallowing your
own spittle after spitting it out on the ground.\"

After a few minutes the Master continued: \'The members of the Brahmo
Samaj do not accept God with form.

Narendra says that God with form is a mere idol. He says further:
\'What? He still goes to the Kāli temple!\'\"

Sri Ramakrishna and his party arrived at Balaram\'s house. Yajnanath of
Nandanbagan came to invite the Master to his house at four o\'clock in
the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna agreed to go if he felt well. After
Yajnanath\'s departure the Master went into an ecstatic mood. He said to
the Divine Mother: \"Mother, what is all this? Stop! What are these
things Thou art showing to me? What is it that Thou dost reveal to me
through Rakhal and others? The form is disappearing. But, Mother, what
people call \'man\' is only a pillow-case, nothing but a pillow-case.
Consciousness is Thine alone.

\"The modern Brahmajnanis have not tasted Thy sweet bliss. Their eyes
look dry and so do their faces. They won\'t achieve anything without
ecstatic love of God.

\"Mother, once I asked Thee to give me a companion just like myself. Is
that why Thou hast given me Rakhal? \"

The Master went to Adhar\'s house, where arrangements were being made
for the kirtan. Many devotees and neighbours had gathered in Adhar\'s
drawing-room, anxious to listen to the Master\'s words.

**Spiritual inspiration comes from God**

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Both worldliness and liberation depend on
God\'s will. It is God alone who has kept man in the world in a state of
ignorance; and man will be free when God, of His own sweet will, calls
him to Himself. It is like the mother calling the child at meal-time,
when he is out playing. When the time comes for setting a man free, God
makes him seek the company of holy men. Further, it is God who makes him
restless for spiritual life.\"

A NEIGIHBOUR: \"What kind of restlessness, sir?\"

MASTER: \"Like the restlessness of a clerk who has lost his job. He
makes the round of the offices daily and asks whether there is any
vacancy. When that restlessness comes, man longs for God. A fop, seated
comfortably with one leg over the other, chewing betel-leaf and twirling
his moustaches-a carefree dandy-, cannot attain God.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"Can one get this longing for God through frequenting the
company of holy men?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, it is possible. But not for a confirmed scoundrel. A
sannyasi\'s kamandalu, made of bitter gourd, travels with him to the
four great places of pilgrimage but still does not lose its
bitterness.\"

The kirtan began. The musician sang of Sri Krishna\'s life in Vrindāvan:

RADHA: \"Friend, I am about to die. Give me back my Krishna.\"

FRIEND: \"But, Radha; the cloud of Krishna was ready to burst into rain.
It was yourself who blew it away with the strong wind of your pique. You
are certainly not happy to see Krishna happy; or why were you piqued?\"

RADHA: \"But this pride was not mine. My pride has gone away with Him
who made me proud.\"

After the music Sri Ramakrishna conversed with the devotees.

MASTER: \"The gopis worshipped Katyayani in order to be united with Sri
Krishna. Everyone is under the authority of the Divine Mother, Mahamaya,
the Primal Energy. Even the Incarnations of God accept the help of maya
to fulfil their mission on earth. Therefore they worship the Primal
Energy. Don\'t you see how bitterly Rama wept for Sita? \'Brahman weeps,
ensnared in the meshes of maya.\'

\"Vishnu incarnated Himself as a sow in order to kill the demon
Hiranyaksha. After killing the demon, the sow remained quite happy with
her young ones. Forgetting her real nature, she was suckling them very
contentedly. The gods in heaven could not persuade Vishnu to relinquish
His sow\'s body and return to the celestial regions. He was absorbed in
the happiness of His beast form. After consulting among themselves, the
gods sent Śiva to the sow. Śiva asked the sow, \'Why have you forgotten
yourself?\' Vishnu replied through the sow\'s body, \'Why, I am quite
happy here.\' Thereupon with a stroke of his trident Śiva destroyed the
sow\'s body, and Vishnu went back to heaven.\"

**Ramchandra Dutta**

From Adhar\'s house Sri Ramakrishna went to Ram\'s house. Ramchandra
Dutta, one of the chief householder disciples of the Master, lived in
Calcutta. He had been one of the first to announce the Master as an
Incarnation of God. The Master had visited his house a number of times
and unstintingly praised the devotion and generosity of this beloved
disciple. A few of the Master\'s disciples made Ram\'s house virtually
their own dwelling-place.

Ram had arranged a special festival to celebrate the Master\'s visit.
The small courtyard was nicely decorated. A kathak, seated on a raised
platform, was reciting from the Bhagavata when the Master arrived. Ram
greeted him respectfully and seated him near the reader. The disciple
was extremely happy. The kathak was in the midst of the story of King
Harischandra.

**Story of Harishchandra**

The great King Harischandra of the Purana was the embodiment of
generosity. No one ever went away from him empty-handed. Now, the sage
Viswamitra, wanting to test the extent of the king\'s charity, extracted
from him a promise to grant any boon that he might ask. Then the sage
asked for the gift of the sea-girt world, of which Harischandra was
king. Without the slightest hesitation the king gave away his kingdom.
Then Viswamitra demanded the auxiliary fee, which alone makes charity
valid and meritorious. The kathak continued his recitation:

Viswamitra said to the king: \"O King, you have given away the entire
world, which was your kingdom. It now belongs to me; you cannot claim
any place here. But you may live in Benares, which belongs to Śiva. I
shall lead you there with your wife Saibya, and Rohitasva, your son.
There you can procure the auxiliary fee that you owe me.\" The royal
family, accompanied by the sage, reached Benares and visited the temple
of Śiva.

At the very mention of Śiva, the Master went into spiritual mood and
repeated the holy name several times indistinctly.

The kathak continued:

The king could not procure the fee and was compelled to sell Saibya, his
royal consort, to a brahmin. With her went Prince Rohitasva. But since
even that was not enough to redeem his pledge to the sage, Harischandra
sold himself to an untouchable who kept a cremation ground. He was
ordered to supervise the cremations. One day, while plucking flowers for
his brahmin master, Prince Rohitasva was bitten by a venomous snake and
that very night died. The cruel brahmin would not leave his bed to help
the poor mother cremate the body. The night was dark and stormy.
Lightning rent the black clouds. Saibya started for the cremation ground

alone, carrying the body of her son in her arms. Smitten with fear and
overpowered with grief, the queen filled heaven and earth with her
wailing. Arriving at the cremation ground, she did not recognize her
husband, who demanded the usual fee for the cremation. Saibya was
penniless and wept bitterly at her unending misfortunes. The
impenetrable darkness was illumined only by the terrible flames of the
cremation pyres. Above her the thunder roared, and before her the
uncouth guardian of the cremation ground demanded his fee. She who had
once been queen of the world sat there with her only child dead and cold
on her lap.

The devotees burst into tears and loudly lamented this tragic episode of
a royal life. And what was the Master doing? He was listening to the
recital with rapt attention. Tear-drops appeared in his eyes and he
wiped them away.

The kathak continued:

When the queen, wailing bitterly, uttered the name of her husband,
Harischandra at once recognized his wife and son. Then the two wept for
the dead prince. Yet in all these misfortunes the king never once
uttered a word of regret for his charity.

Finally the sage Viswamitra appeared and told them that he had only
wanted to put the king\'s charitable impulses to a crucial test. Then,
through his spiritual power, the sage brought the prince back to life
and returned to the king his lost kingdom.

**Story of Uddhava**

Sri Ramakrishna asked the kathak to recite the episode of Uddhava, the
friend and devotee of Krishna.

At the request of Krishna, Uddhava had gone to Vrindāvan to console the
cowherds and the gopis, who were sore at heart because of their
separation from their beloved Krishna.

The Kathak said:

When Uddhava arrived at Vrindāvan, the gopis and cowherd boys ran to him
eagerly and asked him: \"How is our Krishna? Has He forgotten us
altogether? Doesn\'t He even speak our names?\" So saying, some of them
wept. Others accompanied him to various places in Vrindāvan still filled
with Krishna\'s sweet memory. They said: \"Here it was that Krishna
lifted up Mount Govardhan, and here He killed the demons sent by the
evil-minded Kamśa. In this meadow He tended His cows; here on the bank
of the Jamuna He sported with the gopis. Here

He played with the cowherd boys, and here in these groves He met the
gopis secretly.\" Uddhava said to them: \"Why are you so grief-stricken
at Krishna\'s absence? He resides in all beings as their indwelling
Spirit. He is God Himself, and nothing can exist without God.\" \"But\",
said the gopis, \"we do not understand all that. We can neither read nor
write. We know only our Krishna of Vrindāvan, who played with us here in
so many ways.\" Uddhava said: \"Krishna is God Himself. By meditating on
Him, man escapes from birth and death in the world and attains
liberation.\" The gopis said: \"We do not understand big words like
\'liberation\'. We want to see the Krishna of our hearts.\"

The Master listened to the story from the Bhagavata with great attention
and said at last, \"Yes, the gopis were right.\"

Then he sang:

> *Though I am never loath to grant salvation,*
>
> *I hesitate indeed, to grant pure love.*
>
> *Whoever wins pure love surpasses all;*
>
> *He is adored by men;*
>
> *He triumphs over the three worlds.*
>
> *Listen, Chandravali! I shall tell you of love:*
>
> *Mukti a man may gain, but rare is bhakti.*
>
> *Solely for pure love\'s sake did I become*
>
> *King Vali\'s door-keeper*
>
> *Down in his realm in the nether world.*
>
> *Alone in Vrindāvan can pure love be found;*
>
> *Its secret none but the gopas and gopis know.*
>
> *For pure love\'s sake I dwelt in Nanda\'s house;*
>
> *Taking him as My father,*
>
> *I carried his burdens on My head.*

The Master said to the kathak: \"The gopis had ecstatic love, unswerving
and single-minded devotion to one ideal. Do you know the meaning of
devotion that is not loyal to one ideal? It is devotion tinged with
intellectual knowledge. It makes one feel: \'Krishna has become all
these. He alone is the Supreme Brahman. He is Rama, Śiva, and Śakti.\'
But this element of knowledge is not present in ecstatic love of God.
Once Hanuman came to Dwaraka and wanted to see Sita and Rama. Krishna
said to Rukmini, His queen, \'You had better assume the form of Sita;
otherwise there will be no escape from the hands of Hanuman.\'

\"Once the Pandava brothers performed the Rajasuya sacrifice. All the
kings placed Yudhisthira on the royal throne and bowed low before him in
homage. But Bibhishana, the King of Ceylon, said, \'I bow down to
Narayana and to none else.\' At these words the Lord Krishna bowed down
to Yudhisthira. Only then did Bibhishana prostrate himself, crown and
all, before him.

\"Do you know what devotion to one ideal is like? It is like the
attitude of a daughter-in-law in the family. She serves all the members
of the family-her brothers-in-law, father-in-law, husband, and so
forth-, bringing them water to wash their feet, fetching their towels,
arranging their seats, and the like; but with her husband she has a
special relationship.

**Characteristics of divine love**

\"There are two elements in this ecstatic love: \'I-ness\' and
\'my-ness\'. Yaśoda used to think: \'Who would look after Gopala if I
did not? He will fall ill if I do not serve Him.\' She did not look on
Krishna as God. The other element is \'my-ness\'. It means to look on
God as one\'s own-\'my Gopala\'. Uddhava said to Yaśoda: \'Mother, your
Krishna is God Himself. He is the Lord of the Universe and not a common
human being.\' \'Oh!\' exclaimed Yaśoda. \'I am not asking you about
your Lord of the Universe. I want to know how my Gopala fares. Not the
Lord of the Universe, but my Gopala.\'

\"How faithful to Krishna the gopis were! After many entreaties to the
door-keeper, the gopis entered the royal court in Mathura, where Krishna
was seated as king. The door-keeper took them to Him; but at the sight
of King Krishna wearing the royal turban, the gopis bent down their
heads and said among themselves: \'Who is this man with a turban on his
head? Should we violate our chaste love for Krishna by talking to him?
Where is our beloved Krishna with the yellow robe and the bewitching
crest with the peacock feather?\'

\"Did you observe the single-minded love of the gopis for Krishna? The
ideal of Vrindāvan is unique. I am told that the people of Dwaraka
worship Krishna, the companion of Arjuna, but reject Radha.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Which is the better, ecstatic love or love mixed with
knowledge?\"

**Parable of the three friends**

MASTER: \"It is not possible to develop ecstatic love of God unless you
love Him very deeply and regard Him as your very own.

\"Listen to a story. Once three friends were going through a forest,
when a tiger suddenly appeared before them. \'Brothers,\' one of them
exclaimed, \'we are lost!\' \'Why should you say that?\' said the second
friend. \'Why should we be lost? Come, let us pray to God.\' The third
friend said: \'No. Why should we trouble God about it? Come, let us
climb this tree.\'

\"The friend who said, \'We are lost!\' did not know that there is a God
who is our Protector. The friend who asked the others to pray to God was
a jnani. He was aware that God is the Creator, Preserver, and Destroyer
of the world. The third friend, who didn\'t want to trouble God with
prayers and suggested climbing the tree, had ecstatic love of God. It is
the very nature of such love that it makes a man think himself stronger
than his Beloved. He is always alert lest his Beloved should suffer. The
one desire of his life is to keep his Beloved from even being pricked in
the foot by a thorn.\"

Ram served the Master and the devotees with delicious sweets.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 11**

WITH THE DEVOTEES AT DAKSHINESWAR (I)

> Monday, June 4, 1883

ABOUT NINE O\'CLOCK in the morning the devotees began to arrive at the
temple garden. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the porch of his room
facing the Ganges. M., who had spent the previous night with the Master,
sat near him. Balarām and several other devotees were present. Rākhāl
lay on the floor, resting his head on the Master\'s lap. For the past
few days the Master had been regarding Rākhāl as the Baby Krishna.

Seeing Trailokya passing on his way to the Kali temple, Sri Ramakrishna
asked Rākhāl to get up. Trailokya bowed to the Master.

MASTER (to Trailokya): \"Was there no yatra performance last night?\"

TRAILOKYA: \"No, sir. We couldn\'t conveniently arrange it.\"

MASTER: \"What is done is done. But please see that this doesn\'t happen
again. The traditions of the temple should be properly observed.\"

Trailokya gave a suitable reply and went on his way. After a while Ram
Chatterji, the priest of the Vishnu temple, came up to Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER: \"Well, Ram, I told Trailokya that the yatra performance should
not be omitted again. Was I right in saying that?\" .

RAM: \"What of it, sir? Of course you were right. The traditions should
be observed.\"

The Master asked Balarām to stay for his midday meal. Before the meal
Sri Ramakrishna described to the devotees the days of his
God-intoxication. Rākhāl , M., Ramlal, and a few others were present.

**Master\'s attitude toward young disciples**

MASTER: \"Now and then Hazra comes forward to teach me. He says to me,
\'Why do you think so much about the youngsters?\' One day, as I was
going to Balarām\'s house in a carriage, I felt greatly troubled about
it. I said to the Divine Mother: \'Mother, Hazra admonishes me for
worrying about Narendra and the other young boys. He asks me why I
forget God and think about these youngsters.\' No sooner did this
thought arise in my mind than the Divine Mother revealed to me in a
flash that it is She Herself who has become man. But She manifests
Herself most clearly through a. pure soul. At this vision I went into
samadhi. Afterwards I felt angry with Hazra. I said to myself, \'That
rascal made me miserable.\' Then I thought: \'But why should I blame the
poor man? How is he to know?\'

**His yearning for Narendra**

\"I know these youngsters to be Narayana Himself. At my first meeting
with Narendra I found him completely indifferent to his body. When I
touched his chest with my hand, he lost consciousness of the outer
world. Regaining consciousness, Narendra said: \'Oh, what have you done
to me? I have my father and mother at home!\' The same thing happened at
Jadu Mallick\'s house. As the days passed I longed more and more to see
him. My heart yearned for him. One day at that time I said to Bholanath:
\'Can you tell me why I should feel this way? There is a boy called
Narendra, of the kayastha caste. Why should I feel so restless for
him?\' Bholanath said: \'You will find the explanation in the
Mahabharata. On coming down to the plane of ordinary consciousness, a
man established in samadhi enjoys himself in the company of sattvic
people. He feels peace of mind at the sight of such men.\' When I heard
this my mind was set at ease. Now and then I would sit

alone and weep for the sight of Narendra.

**Reminiscences of his God-intoxicated state**

\"Oh, what a state of mind I passed through! When I first had that
experience, I could not perceive the coming and going of day or night.
People said I was insane. What else could they say? They made me marry.
I was then in a state of God-intoxication. At first I felt worried about
my wife. Then I thought she too would eat and drink and live like me.

\"I visited my father-in-law\'s house. They arranged a kirtan. It was a
great religious festival, and there was much singing of God\'s holy
name. Now and then I would wonder about my future. I would say to the
Divine Mother, \'Mother, I shall take my spiritual experiences to be
real if the landlords of the country show me respect.\' They too came of
their own accord and talked with me.

\"Oh, what an ecstatic state it was! Even the slightest suggestion would
awaken my spiritual consciousness. I worshipped the \'Beautiful\' in a
girl fourteen years old. I saw that she was the personification of the
Divine Mother. At the end of the worship I bowed before her and offered
a rupee at her feet. One day I witnessed a Ramlila performance. I saw
the performers to be the actual Sita, Rāma, Lakshmana, Hanuman, and
Bibhishana. Then I worshipped the actors and actresses who played those
parts.

\"At that time I used to invite maidens here and worship them. I found
them to be embodiments of the Divine Mother Herself.

\"One day I saw a woman in blue standing near the bakul-tree. She was a
prostitute. But she instantly kindled in me the vision of Sita. I forgot
the woman. I saw that it was Sita herself on her way to meet Rāma after
her rescue from Ravana in Ceylon. For a long time I remained in samadhi,
unconscious of the outer world.

\"Another day I had gone to the Maidan in Calcutta for fresh air. A
great crowd had assembled there to watch a balloon ascension. Suddenly I
saw an English boy leaning against a tree. As he stood there his body
was bent in three places. The vision of Krishna came before me in a
flash. I went into samadhi.

\"Once, at Sihore, I fed the cowherd boys. I put sweetmeats into their
hands. I saw that these boys were actually the cowherd boys of
Vrindavan, and I partook of the sweetmeats from their hands.

\"At that time I was almost unconscious of thc outer world. Mathur Babu
kept me at his Janbazar mansion a few days. While living there I
regarded myself as the handmaid of the Divine Mother. The ladies of the
house didn\'t feel at all bashful with me. They felt as free before me
as women feel before a small boy or girl. I used to escort Mathur\'s
daughter to her husband\'s chamber with the maidservant.

\"Even now the slightest thing awakens God-Consciousness in me. Rākhāl
used to repeat the name of God half aloud. At such times I couldn\'t
control myself. It would rouse my spiritual consciousness and overwhelm
me.\"

Sri Ramakrishna went on describing the different experiences he had had
while worshipping the Divine Mother as Her handmaid. He said: \"Once I
imitated a professional woman, singer for a man singer. He said my
acting was quite correct and asked me where I had learnt it.\" The
Master repeated his imitation for the devotees, and they burst into
laughter.

After his noon meal the Master took a short rest. Manilal Mallick, an
old member of the Brahmo Samaj, entered the room and sat down after
saluting the Master, who was still lying on his bed. Manilal asked him
questions now and then, and the Master, still half asleep, answered with
a word or two. Manilal said that Shivanath admired Nityagopal\'s
spiritual state. The Master asked in a sleepy tone what they thought of
Hazra.

Then Sri Ramakrishna sat up on his bed and told Manilal about
Bhavanath\'s devotion to God.

MASTER: \"Ah, what an exalted state he is in! He has hardly begun to
sing about God before his eyes fill with tears. The very sight of Harish
made him ecstatic. He said that Harish was very lucky. He made the
remark because Harish was spending a few days here, now and then, away
from his home.\"

Sri Ramakrishna asked M., \"Well, what is the cause of bhakti? Why
should the spiritual feeling of young boys like Bhavanath be awakened?\"
M. remained silent.

MASTER: \"The fact is, all men may look alike from the outside, but some
of them have fillings of \'condensed milk\'. Cakes may have fillings of
condensed milk or powdered black grams, but they all look alike from the
outside. The desire to know God, ecstatic love of Him, and such other
spiritual qualities are the \'condensed milk\'.\"

> **Reassurance to the devotees & Parable of the tigress** Sri
> Ramakrishna spoke reassuringly to the devotees.

MASTER (to M.): \"Some think: \'Oh, I am a bound soul. I shall never
acquire knowledge and devotion.\' But if one receives the guru\'s grace,
one has nothing to fear. Once a tigress attacked a flock of goats. As
she sprang on her prey, she gave birth to a cub and died. The cub grew
up in the company of the goats. The goats ate grass and the cub followed
their example. They bleated; the cub bleated too. Gradually it grew to
be a big tiger. One day another tiger attacked the same flock. It was
amazed to see the grass-eating tiger. Running after it, the wild tiger
at last seized it, whereupon the grass-eating tiger began to bleat. The
wild tiger dragged it to the water and said: \'Look at your face in the
water. It is just like mine. Here is a little meat. Eat it.\' Saying
this, it thrust some meat into its mouth. But the grass-eating tiger
would not swallow it and began to bleat again. Gradually, however, it
got the taste for blood and came to relish the meat. Then the wild tiger
said: \'Now you see there is no difference between you and me. Come
along and follow me into the forest.\'

\"So there can be no fear if the guru\'s grace descends on one. He will
let you know who you are and what your real nature is.

\"If the devotee practises spiritual discipline a little, the guru
explains everything to him. Then the disciple understands for himself
what is real and what is unreal. God alone is real, and the world is
illusory.

**Parable of the false ascetic**

\"One night a fisherman went into a garden and cast his net into the
lake in order to steal some fish. The owner heard him and surrounded him
with his servants. They brought lighted torches and began to search for
him. In the mean time the fisherman smeared his body with ashes and sat
under a tree, pretending to be a holy man. The owner and his men
searched a great deal but could not find the thief. All they saw was a
holy man covered with ashes, meditating under a tree. The next day the
news spread in the neighbourhood that a great sage was staying in the
garden. People gathered there and saluted him with offerings of fruit,
flowers, and sweets. Many also offered silver and copper coins. \'How
strange!\' thought the fisherman. \'I am not a genuine holy man, and
still people show such devotion to me. I shall certainly realize God if
I become a true sadhu. There is no doubt about it.\'

\"If a mere pretence of religious life can bring such spiritual
awakening, you can imagine the effect of real sadhana. In that state you
will surely realize what is real and what is unreal. God alone is real,
and the world is illusory.\"

**The world is a dream**

One of the devotees said to himself: \"Is the world unreal, then? The
fisherman, to be sure, renounced worldly life. What, then, will happen
to those who live in the world? Must they too renounce it?\" Sri
Ramakrishna, who could see into a man\'s innermost thought, said very
tenderly: \"Suppose an office clerk has been sent to jail.

He undoubtedly leads a prisoner\'s life there. But when he is released
from jail, does he cut capers in the street? Not at all. He gets a job
as a clerk again and goes on working as before. Even after attaining
Knowledge through the guru\'s grace, one can very well live in the world
as a Jivanmukta.\" Thus did Sri Ramakrishna reassure those who were
living as householders.

MANILAL: \"Sir, where shall I meditate on God when I perform my daily
worship?\"

MASTER: \"Why, the heart is a splendid place. Meditate on God there.\"

Manilal, a member of the Brahmo Samaj, believed in a formless God.
Addressing him, the Master said: \"Kabir

used to say: \'God with form is my Mother, the formless God my Father.
Whom should I blame? Whom should

1.  adore? The two sides of the scales are even.\' During the day-time
    Haladhari used to meditate on God with form, and at night on the
    formless God. Whichever attitude you adopt, you will certainly
    realize God if you have firm faith. You may believe in God with form
    or in God without form, but your faith must be sincere and
    whole-hearted. Sambhu Mallick used to come on foot from Baghbazar to
    his garden house at Dakshineswar. One day a friend said to him: \'It
    is risky to walk such a long distance. Why don\'t you come in a
    carriage?\' At that Sambhu\'s face turned red and he exclaimed: \'I
    set out repeating the name of God! What danger can befall me?\'
    Through faith alone one attains everything. I used to say, \'I shall
    take all this to be true if I meet a certain person or if a certain
    officer of the temple garden talks to me.\' What I would think of
    would invariably come to pass.\"

M. had studied English logic. In the chapters on fallacies he had read
that only superstitious people believed in the coincidence of morning
dreams with actual events. Therefore he asked the Master, \"Was there
never any exception?\"

MASTER: \"No. At that time everything happened that way. I would repeat
the name of God and believe that a certain thing would happen, and it
would invariably come to pass. (To Manilal) But you must remember,
unless one is guileless and broad-minded, one cannot have such faith.
Bony people, the hollow-eyed, the cross-eyed-people with physical traits
like those cannot easily acquire faith. What can a man do if there are
evil omens on all sides?\"

It was dusk. The maidservant entered the room and burnt incense. Manilal
and some other devotees left for Calcutta. M. and Rākhāl were in the
room. The Master was seated on his small couch absorbed in meditation on
the Divine Mother. There was complete silence.

After a time Bhagavati, an old maidservant of the temple proprietor,
entered the room and saluted the Master from a distance. Sri Ramakrishna
bade her sit down. The Master had known her for many years. In her
younger days she had lived a rather immoral life; but the Master\'s
compassion was great. Soon he began to converse with her.

MASTER: \"Now you are pretty old. Have you been feeding the Vaishnavas
and holy men, and thus spending your money in a noble way?\"

BHAGAVATI (smiling): \"How can I say that?\"

MASTER: \"Have you been to Vrindavan, Benares, and the other holy
places?\"

BHAGAVATI (shrinkingly): \"How can I say that- I have built a bathing
place, and my name is inscribed there on a slab.\"

MASTER: \"Indeed!\"

BHAGAVATI: \"Yes, sir. My name, \'Srimati Bhagavati Dasi\', is written
there.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"How nice!\"

Emboldened by the Master\'s words, Bhagavati approached and saluted him,
touching his feet. Like a man stung by a scorpion, Sri Ramakrishna stood
up and cried out, \"Govinda! Govinda!\" A big jar of Ganges water stood
in a comer of the room. He hurried there, panting, and washed with the
holy water the spot the maidservant had touched. The devotees in the
room were amazed to see this incident. Bhagavati sat as if struck dead.

Sri Ramakrishna consoled her and said in a very kindly tone, \"You
should salute me from a distance.\" In order to relieve her mind of all
embarrassment, the Master said tenderly, \"Listen to a few songs.\"

The Master then sang about the Divine Mother:

> *The black bee of my mind is drawn in sheer delight*
>
> *To the blue lotus flower of Mother Syama\'s feet. . . .*

Then he sang:

> *High in the heaven of the Mother\'s feet, my mind was soaring like a
> kite,*
>
> *When came a gust of sin\'s rough wind that drove it swiftly toward
> the earth. . . .*

Again:

> *Dwell, O mind, within yourself;*
>
> *Enter no other\'s home.*
>
> *If you but seek there, you will find*
>
> *All you are searching for.*
>
> *God, the true Philosopher\'s Stone,*
>
> *Who answers every prayer,*
>
> *Lies hidden deep within your heart,*
>
> *The richest gem of all.*
>
> *How many pearls and precious stones*
>
> *Are scattered all about*
>
> *The outer court that lies before*
>
> *The chamber of your heart!*

**Tuesday, June 5, 1883**

Rākhāl and Hazra were staying with the Master in the temple garden at
Dakshineswar. M., too, had been there since the previous Sunday. As it
was a week-day there were only a few devotees in the room. Generally
people gathered there in large numbers on Sundays or holidays.

It was afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna was telling the devotees about his
experiences during his God-intoxicated state.

MASTER (to M.): \"Oh, what a state I passed through! At that time I
didn\'t eat my meals here. I would enter the house of a brahmin in the
village or at Baranagore or at Ariadaha. Generally it would be past
meal-time. I would just sit down there without saying a word. If the
members of the household asked me why I had come, I would simply say,
\'I want something to eat.\' Now and then I would go, uninvited of
course, to Ram Chatterji\'s house at Alambazar or to the Choudhurys at
Dakshineswar. But I didn\'t relish the food at the Choudhurys\' house.

\"One day I begged Mathur to take me to Devendra Tagore\'s house. I
said: \'Devendra chants the name of God, I want to see him. Will you
take me there?\' Mathur Babu was a very proud man. How could one expect
him to go to another man\'s house uninvited? At first he hesitated. But
then he said: \'All right. Devendra and I were fellow students. I will
take you to him.\'

\"Another day I learnt of a good man named Dina Mukherji, living at
Baghbazar near the bridge. He was a devotee. I asked Mathur to take me
there. Finding me insistent, he took me to Dina\'s house in a carriage.
It was a small place. The arrival of a rich man in a big carriage
embarrassed the inmates. We too were embarrassed. That day Dina\'s son
was being invested with the sacred thread. The house was crowded, and
there was hardly any place for Dina to receive us. We were about to
enter a side room, when someone cried out: \'Please don\'t go into that
room. There are ladies there.\' It was really a distressing situation.
Returning, Mathur Babu said, \'Father, I shall never listen to you
again.\' I laughed.

\"Oh, what a state I passed through! Once Kumar Singh gave a feast to
the sadhus and invited me too. I found a great many holy men assembled
there. When I sat down for the meal, several sadhus asked me about
myself. At once I felt like leaving them and sitting alone. I wondered
why they should bother about all that. The sadhus took their seats. I
began to eat before they had started. I heard several of them remark,
\'Oh! What sort of man is this?\' \"

**Parable of the farmer**

It was about five o\'clock in the afternoon. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting
on the steps of his verandah. Hazra, Rākhāl , and M. were near him.
Hazra had the attitude of a Vedantist: \"I am He.\"

MASTER (to Hazra): \"Yes, all one\'s confusion comes to an end if one
only realizes that it is God who manifests Himself as the atheist and
the believer, the good and the bad, the real and the unreal; that it is
He who is present in waking and in sleep; and that He is beyond all
these.

\"There was a farmer to whom an only son was born when he was rather
advanced in age. As the child grew up, his parents became very fond of
him. One day the farmer was out working in the fields, when a neighbour
told him that his son was dangerously ill-indeed, at the point of death.
Returning home he found the boy dead. His wife wept bitterly, but his
own eyes remained dry. Sadly the wife said to her ncighbours, \'Such a
son has passed away, and he hasn\'t even one tear to shed!\' After a
long while the farmer said to his wife: \'Do you know why I am not
crying? Last night I dreamt I had become a king, and the father of seven
princes. These princes were beautiful as well as virtuous. They grew in
stature and acquired wisdom and knowledge in the various arts. Suddenly
I woke up. Now I have been wondering whether I should weep for those
seven children or this one boy.\' To the jnanis the waking state is no
more real than the dream state.

\"God alone is the Doer. Everything happens by His will.\"

**Law of karma**

HAZRA: \"But it is very difficult to understand that. Take the case of
the sadhu of Bhukailas. How people tortured him and; in a way, killed
him! They had found him in samadhi. First they buried him, then they put
him under water, and then they branded him with a hot iron. Thus they
brought him back to consciousness of the world. But in the end the sadhu
died as a result of these tortures. He undoubtedly suffered at the hands
of men, though, as you say, he died by the will of God.\"

MASTER: \"Man must reap the fruit of his own karma. But as far as the
death of that holy man is concerned, it was brought about by the will of
God. The kavirajs prepare makaradhvaja in a bottle. The bottle is
covered with clay and heated in the fire. The gold inside the bottle
melts and combines with the other ingredients, and the medicine is made.
Then the physicians break the bottle carefully and take out the
medicine. When the medicine is made, what difference does it make
whether the bottle is preserved or broken? So people think that the holy
man was killed. But perhaps his inner stuff had been made. After the
realization of God, what difference does it make whether the body lives
or dies?

**Different kinds of samadhi**

\"The sadhu of Bhukailas was in samadhi. There are many kinds of
samadhi. My own spiritual experiences tally with the words I heard from
a sadhu of Hrishikesh. Sometimes I feel the rising of the spiritual
current inside me, as though it were the creeping of an ant. Sometimes
it feels like the movement of a monkey jumping

from one branch to another. Again, sometimes it feels like a fish
swimming in water. Only he who experiences it knows what it is like. In
samadhi one forgets the world. When the mind comes down a little, I say
to the Divine Mother: \'Mother, please cure me of this. I want to talk
to people.\'

\"None but the Isvarakotis can return to the plane of relative
consciousness after attaining samadhi. Some ordinary men attain samadhi
through spiritual discipline; but they do not come back. But when God
Himself is born as a man, as an Incarnation, holding in His hand the key
to others\' liberation, then for the welfare of humanity the Incarnation
returns from samadhi to consciousness of the world.\"

M. (to himself): \"Does the Master hold in his hand the key to man\'s
liberation?\"

HAZRA: \"The one thing needful is to please God. What does it matter
whether an Incarnation of God exists or not?\"

It was the day of the new moon. Gradually night descended and dense
darkness enveloped the trees and the temples. A few lights shone here
and there in the temple garden. The black sky was reflected in the
waters of the Ganges.

The Master went to the verandah south of his room. A spiritual mood was
the natural state of his mind. The dark night of the new moon,
associated with the black complexion of Kali, the Divine Mother,
intensified his spiritual exaltation. Now and then he repeated \"Om\"
and the name of Kali.

He lay down on a mat and whispered to M.

MASTER: \"Yes, God can be seen. X- has had a vision of God. But don\'t
tell anyone about it. Tell me, which do you like better, God with form,
or the formless Realitv?\"

1.  \"Sir, nowadays I like to think of God without form. But I am also
    beginning to understand that it is God alone who manifests Himself
    through different forms.\"

MASTER: \"Will you take me in a carriage some day to Mati Seal\'s garden
house at Belgharia? When you throw puffed rice into the lake there, the
fish come to the surface and eat it. Ah! I feel so happy to see them
sport in the water. That will awaken your spiritual consciousness too.
You will feel as if the fish of the human soul were playing in the Ocean
of Satchidananda. In the same manner, I go into an ecstatic mood when I
stand in a big meadow. I feel like a fish released from a bowl into a
lake.

\"Spiritual discipline is necessary in order to see God. I had to pass
through very severe discipline. How many austerities I practised under
the bel-tree! I would lie down under it, crying to the Divine Mother,
\'O Mother, reveal Thyself to me.\' The tears would flow in torrents and
soak my body.\"

23. \"You practised so many austerities, but people expect to realize
    God in a moment! Can a man build a wall simply by moving his finger
    around his home?\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Amrita says that one man lights a fire and ten
bask in its heat. I want to tell you something else. It is good to
remain on the plane of the Lila after reaching the Nitya.\"

23. \"You once said that one comes down to the plane of the Lila in
    order to enjoy the divine play.\" MASTER; \"No, not exactly that.
    The Lila is real too.

\"Let me tell you something. Whenever you come here, bring a trifle with
you. Perhaps I shouldn\'t say it; it may look like egotism. I also told
Adhar Sen that he should bring a pennyworth of something with him. I
asked Bhavanath to bring a pennyworth of betel-leaf. Have you noticed
Bhavanath\'s devotion? Narendra and he seem like man and woman. He is
devoted to Narendra. Bring Narendra here with you in a carriage, and
also bring some sweets with you. It will do you good.

**Paths of love and knowledge**

\"Knowledge and love-both are paths leading to God. Those who follow the
path of love have to observe a little more outer purity. But the
violation of this by a man following the path of knowledge cannot injure
him. It is destroyed in the fire of knowledge. Even a banana tree is
burnt up when it is thrown into a roaring fire.

\"The jnanis follow the path of discrimination. Sometimes it happens
that, discriminating between the Real and the unreal, a man loses his
faith in the existence of God. But a devotee who sincerely yearns for
God does not give up his meditation even though he is invaded by
atheistic ideas. A man whose father and. grandfather have been farmers
continues his farming even though he doesn\'t get any crop in a year of
drought.\"

Lying on the mat and resting his head on a pillow, Sri Ramakrishna
continued the conversation. He said to M: \"My legs are aching. Please
stroke them gently.\" Thus, out of his infinite compassion, the Master
allowed his disciple to render him personal service.

**June 8, 1883**

It was a summer day. The evening service in the Kali temple was over.
Sri Ramakrishna stood before the image of the Divine Mother and waved
the fan a few minutes.

Ram, Kedar Chatterji, and Tarak arrived from Calcutta with flowers and
sweets. Kedar was about fifty years old. At first he had frequented the
Brahmo Samaj and joined other religious sects in his search for God, but
later on he had accepted the Master as his spiritual guide. He was an
accountant in a government office and lived in a suburb of Calcutta.

Tarak was a young man of twenty-four. His wife had died shortly after
their marriage. He hailed from the village of Barasat not far from
Calcutta. His father, a highly spiritual soul, had visited Sri
Ramakrishna many times. Tarak often went to Ram\'s house and used to go
to Dakshineswar in the company of Ram and Nityagopal. He worked in a
business firm, but his attitude toward the world was one of utter
indifference.

As Sri Ramakrishna came out of the temple, he saw Ram, Kedar, M., Tarak,
and other devotees standing outside. He showed his affection for Tarak
by touching his chin. He was very happy to see him.

Returning to his room, the Master sat on the floor in an ecstatic mood,
with his legs stretched before him.

Ram and Kedar decorated his feet with flowers and garlands. The Master
was in samadhi.

**Master\'s exhortation to a devotee to go forward**

Kedar believed in certain queer practices of a religious sect to which
he had once belonged. He held the Master\'s big toe in his hand,
believing that in this way the Master\'s spiritual power would be
transmitted to him. As Sri Ramakrishna regained partial consciousness,
he said, \"Mother, what can he do to me by holding my toe?\" Kedar sat
humbly with folded hands. Still in an ecstatic mood, the Master said to
Kedar: \"Your mind is still attracted by \'woman and gold\'. What is the
use of saying you don\'t care for it? Go forward. Beyond the forest of
sandal-wood there are many more things: mines of silver, gold, diamonds,
and other precious stones. Having a glimpse of spirituality, don\'t
think you have attained everything.\" The Master was again in an
ecstatic mood. He said to the Divine Mother, \"Mother, take him away.\"
At these words Kedar\'s throat dried up. In a frightened tone he said to
Ram, \"What is the Master saying?\"

At the sight of Rākhāl , Sri Ramakrishna was again overpowered with a
spiritual mood. He said to his beloved disciple: \"I have been here many
days; When did you come?\"

Was the Master hinting that he was an Incarnation of God, and Rākhāl his
divine companion, a member of the inner circle of devotees?

**Sunday, June 10, 1883**

The Master was sitting in his room with Rākhāl , M., Latu, Kishori,
Ramlal, Hazra, and other devotees. It was

about ten o\'clock in the morning.

**Reminiscences of boyhood**

Describing his early life, Sri Ramakrishna said to them: \"During my
younger days the men and women of Kamarpukur were equally fond of me.
They loved to hear me sing. I could imitate other people\'s gestures and
conversation and I used to entertain them that way. The women would put
aside things for me to eat. No one distrusted me. Everybody took me in
as one of the family.

\"But I was like a happy pigeon. I used to frequent only happy families.
I would run away from a place where I saw misery and suffering.

\"One or two young boys of the village were my close friends. I was very
intimate with some of them; but now they are totally immersed in
worldliness. A few of them visit me here now and then and say,
\'Goodness! He seems to be just the same as he was in the village
school!\' While I was at school, arithmetic would throw me into
confusion, but I could paint very well and could also model small images
of the deities.

\"I loved to visit the free eating-places maintained for holy men and
the poor, and would watch them for hours.

\"I loved to hear the reading of sacred books such as the Ramayana and
Bhagavata. If the readers had any affectations, I could easily imitate
them and would entertain others with my mimicry.

\"I understood the behaviour of women very well and imitated their words
and intonations. I could easily recognize immoral women. Immoral widows
part their hair in the middle and perform their toilet with great care.
They have very little modesty. The way they sit is so different! But
let\'s not talk of worldly things any more.\"

The Master asked Ramlal to sing. Ramlal sang:

> *Who is this terrible Woman, dark as the sky at midnight?*
>
> *Who is this Woman dancing over the field of battle.*
>
> *Like a blue lotus that floats on a crimson sea of blood?*
>
> *Who is She, clad alone in the Infinite for a garment,*
>
> *Rolling Her three great eyes in frenzy and savage fury?*
>
> *Under the weight of Her tread the earth itself is trembling!*
>
> *Siva, Her mighty Husband, who wields the fearful trident,*
>
> *Lies like a lifeless corpse beneath Her conquering feet.*

The next song described the grief of Mandodari at the death of her
husband Ravana. As he listened to it the Master shed tears of sorrow and
said: \"Once, when I entered the pine-grove over there, I heard the
boatmen on the Ganges singing that song and wept bitterly for a long
time. I had to be brought back to my room.\"

Ramlal sang about the love of the gopis for Sri Krishna. Akrura was
about to drive Sri Krishna in a chariot from Vrindavan to Mathura. The
gopis would not let Him go. Some held the wheels of the chariot; some
lay down in front of it. They blamed Akrura, not knowing that Sri
Krishna was leaving them of His own will. Akrura was explaining this to
the gopis.

Ramlal sang:

> *Hold not, hold not the chariot\'s wheels!*
>
> *Is it the wheels that make it move?*
>
> *The Mover of its wheels is Krishna,*
>
> *By whose will the worlds are moved. . . .*

About the gopis, the Master said: \"What deep love, what ecstatic
devotion they had for Krishna! Radha painted the picture of Sri Krishna
with her own hand, but did not paint His legs lest He should run away to
Mathura! I

used to sing these songs very often during my boyhood. I could reproduce
the whole drama from memory.\"

After his meal Sri Ramakrishna sat on the couch. He had not yet found
time to rest. The devotees began to assemble. One party arrived from
Manirampur and another from Belgharia. Some of the devotees said, \"We
have disturbed your rest.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, no! What you say applies only to a rajasic man. About him
people say, \'Ah, now he will enjoy his sleep.\'\"

The devotees from Manirampur asked the Master how to realize God.

MASTER: \"You must practise spiritual discipline a little. It will not
do simply to say that milk contains butter. You must let the milk set
into curd and then churn it. Only then can you get butter from it.
Spiritual aspirants must go into solitude now and then. After acquiring
love of God in solitude, they may live in the world. If one is wearing a
pair of shoes, one can easily walk over thorns.

> *\"The most important thing is faith.*
>
> *As is a man\'s meditation, so is his feeling of love;*
>
> *As is a man\'s feeling of love, so is his gain;*
>
> *And faith is the root of all.*
>
> *If one has faith one has nothing to fear.\"*

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, is it necessary to have a guru?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, many need a guru. But a man must have faith in the
guru\'s words. He succeeds in spiritual life by looking on his guru as
God Himself. Therefore the Vaishnavas speak of Guru, Krishna, and
Vaishnava.

\"One should constantly repeat the name of God. The name of God is
highly effective in the Kaliyuga. The practice of yoga is not possible
in this age, for the life of a man depends on food. Clap your hands
while repeating God\'s name, and the birds of your sin will fly away.

\"One should always seek the company of holy men. The nearer you
approach the Ganges, the cooler the breeze will feel. Again, the nearer
you go to a fire, the hotter the air will feel.

\"But one cannot achieve anything through laziness and procrastination.
People who desire worldly enjoyment say about spiritual progress:
\'Well, it will all happen in time. We shall realize God some time or
other.\'

\"I said to Keshab Sen: \'When a father sees that his son has become
restless for his inheritance, he gives him his share of the property
even three years before the legal time. A mother keeps on cooking while
the baby is in bed sucking its toy. But when it throws the toy away and
cries for her, she puts down the rice-pot and takes the baby in her arms
and nurses it.\' I said all this to Keshab.

\"It is said that, in the Kaliyuga, if a man can weep for God one day
and one night, he sees Him.

\"Feel piqued at God and say to Him: \'You have created me. Now You must
reveal Yourself to me.\' Whether you live in the world or elsewhere,
always fix your mind on God. The mind soaked in worldliness may be
compared to a wet match-stick. You won\'t get a spark, however much you
may rub it. Ekalavya placed the clay image of Drona, his teacher, in
front of him and thus learnt archery.

Go forward. The wood-cutter, following the instructions of the holy man,
went forward and found in the forest sandal-wood and mines of silver and
gold; and going still farther, he found diamonds and other precious
stones.

\"The ignorant are like people living in a house with clay walls. There
is very little light inside, and they cannot

see outside at all. But those who enter the world after attaining the
Knowledge of God are like people living in a house made of glass. For
them both inside and outside are light. They can see things outside as
well as inside.

\"Nothing exists except the One. That One is the Supreme Brahman. So
long as He keeps the \'I\' in us, He reveals to us that it is He who, as
the Primal Energy, creates, preserves, and destroys the universe.

\"That which is Brahman is also the Primal Energy. Once a king asked a
yogi to impart Knowledge to him in one word. The yogi said, \'All right;
you will get Knowledge in one word.\' After a while a magician came to
the king. The king saw the magician moving two of his fingers rapidly
and heard him exclaim, \'Behold, O King! Behold.\' The king looked at
him amazed when, after a few minutes, he saw the two fingers becoming
one. The magician moved that one finger rapidly and said, \'Behold, O
King! Behold.\' The implication of the story is that Brahman and the
Primal Energy at first appear to be two. But after attaining the
Knowledge of Brahman one does not see the two. Then there is no
differentiation; it is One, without a second -Advaita-non-duality.\"

The Master was very happy to see a musician who had come with the
devotees from Belghariā. Some time before, Sri Ramakrishna had gone into
an ecstatic mood on hearing his devotional music. At the Master\'s
request the musician sang a few songs, one of which described the
awakening of the Kundalini and the six centres:

> *Awake, Mother! Awake! How long Thou hast been asleep*
>
> *In the lotus of the Muladhara!*
>
> *Fulfil Thy secret function, Mother:*
>
> *Rise to the thousand-petalled lotus within the head,*
>
> *Where mighty Siva has His dwelling;*
>
> *Swiftly pierce the six lotuses*
>
> *And take away my grief, O Essence of Consciousness!*

MASTER: \"The song speaks of the Kundalini\'s passing through the six
centres. God is both within and without. From within He creates the
various states of mind. After passing through the six centres, the jiva
goes beyond the realm of maya and becomes united with the Supreme Soul.
This is the vision of God.

\"One cannot see God unless maya steps aside from the door. Rāma,
Lakshmana, and Sita were walking together. Rāma was in front, Sita
walked in the middle, and Lakshmana followed them. But Lakshmana could
not see Rāma because Sita was between them. In like manner, man cannot
see God because maya is between them. (To Mani Mallick) But maya steps
aside from the door when God shows His grace to the devotee. When the
visitor stands before the door, the door-keeper says to the master,
\'Sir, command us, and we shall let him pass.\'

\"There are two schools of thought: the Vedānta and the Purana.
According to the Vedānta this world is a \'framework of illusion\', that
is to say, it is all illusory, like a dream. But according to the
Purana, the books of devotion, God Himself has become the twenty-four
cosmic principles. Worship God both within and without.

\"As long as God keeps the awareness of \'I\' in us, so long do
sense-objects exist; and we cannot very well speak of the world as a
dream. There is fire in the hearth; therefore the rice and pulse and
potatoes and the other vegetables jump about in the pot. They jump about
as if to say: \'We are here! We are jumping!\' This body is the pot. The
mind and intelligence are the water. The objects of the senses are the
rice, potatoes, and other vegetables. The \'I-consciousness\' identified
with the senses says, \'I am jumping about.\' And Satchidananda is the
fire.

\"Hence the Bhakti scriptures describe this very world as a \'mansion of
mirth\'. Ramprasad sang in one of his songs, \'This world is a framework
of illusion.\' Another devotee gave the reply, \'This very world is a
mansion of mirth.\' As the saying goes, \'The devotee of Kali, free
while living, is full of Eternal Bliss.\' The bhakta sees that He who is
God has also become maya. Again, He Himself has become the universe and
all its living beings.

The bhakta sees God, maya, the universe, and the living beings as one.
Some devotees see everything as Rāma: it is Rāma alone who has become
everything. Some see everything as Radha and Krishna. To them it is
Krishna alone who has become the twenty-four cosmic principles. It is
like seeing everything green through green glasses.

\"But the Bhakti scriptures admit that the manifestations of Power are
different in different beings. It is Rāma who has become everything, no
doubt; but He manifests Himself more in some than in others. There is
one kind of manifestation of Rāma in the Incarnation of God, and another
in men. Even the Incarnations are conscious of the body. Embodiment is
due to maya. Rāma wept for Sita. But the Incarnation of God puts a
bondage over His eyes by His own will, like children playing blindman\'s
buff. The children stop playing when their mother calls them. It is
quite different, however, with the ordinary man. The cloth his eyes are
bandaged with is fastened to his back with screws, as it were. There are
eight fetters. Shame, hatred, fear, caste, lineage, good conduct, grief,
and secretiveness-these are the eight fetters. And they cannot be
unfastened without the help of a guru.

**Earnestness in spiritual life extolled**

A DEVOTEE : \"Sir, please bless us.\"

MASTER: \"God is in all beings. But you must apply to the Gas Company.
It will connect the storage-tank with the pipe in your house.

\"One must pray earnestly. It is said that one can realize God by
directing to Him the combined intensity of three attractions, namely,
the child\'s attraction for the mother, the husband\'s attraction for
the chaste wife, and the attraction of worldly possessions for the
worldly man.

**Traits of a true devotee**

\"There are certain signs by which you can know a true devotee of God.
His mind becomes quiet as he listens to his teacher\'s instruction, just
as the poisonous snake is quieted by the music of the charmer. I don\'t
mean the cobra. There is another sign. A real devotee develops the power
of assimilating instruction. An image cannot be impressed on bare glass,
but only on glass stained with a black solution, as in photography. The
black solution is devotion to God. There is a third sign of a true
devotee. The true devotee has controlled his senses. He has subdued his
lust. The gopis were free from lust.

\"You are talking about your leading a householder\'s life. Suppose you
are a householder. It rather helps in the practice of spiritual
discipline. It is like fighting from inside a fort. The Tantriks
sometimes use a corpse in their religious rites. Now and then the dead
body frightens them by opening its mouth. That is why they keep fried
rice and grams near them, and from time to time they throw some of the
grains into the corpse\'s mouth. Thus pacifying the corpse, they repeat
the name of the Deity without any worry. Likewise, the householder
should pacify his wife and the other members of his family. He should
provide them with food and other necessities. Thus he removes the
obstacles to his practice of spiritual discipline.

\"Those who still have a few worldly experiences to enjoy should lead a
householder\'s life and pray to God. That is why Nityananda allowed the
worldly to enjoy catfish soup and the warm embrace of a young woman
while repeating God\'s name.

\"But it is quite different with genuine sannyasis. A bee lights on
flowers and on nothing else. To the chatak all water except rain is
tasteless. It will drink no other water, but looks up agape for the rain
that falls when the star Svati is in the ascendant. It drinks only that
water. A real sannyasi will not enjoy any kind of bliss except the Bliss
of God. The bee lights only on flowers. The real monk is like a bee,
whereas the householder devotee is like a common fly, which lights on a
festering sore as well as on a sweetmeat.

\"You have taken so much trouble to come here. You must be seeking God.
But almost everyone is satisfied simply by seeing the garden. Only one
or two look for its owner. People enjoy the beauty of the world; they do
not seek its Owner.

(Pointing to the singer) \"A little while ago he sang a song describing
the six centres. These are dealt with in Yoga. There are two kinds of
yoga: hathayoga and rajayoga. The hathayogi practises physical
exercises. His goal is to acquire supernatural powers: longevity and the
eight psychic powers. These are his aims. But the aim of rajayoga is the
attainment of devotion, ecstatic love, knowledge, and renunciation. Of
these two, rajayoga is the better.

**Seven planes of the Vedas**

\"There is much similarity between the seven \'planes\' described in the
Vedānta and the six \'centres\' of Yoga. The first three planes of the
Vedas may be compared to the first three Yogic centres, namely,
Muladhara, Svadhisthana, and Manipura. With ordinary people the mind
dwells in these three planes, at the organs of evacuation and generation
and at the navel. When the mind ascends to the fourth plane, the centre
designated in Yoga as Anahata, it sees the individual soul as a flame.
Besides, it sees light. At this the aspirant cries: \'Ah! What is this?
Ah! What is this?\'

\"When the mind rises to the fifth plane, the aspirant wants to hear
only about God. This is the Visuddha centre of Yoga. The sixth plane and
the centre known by the yogi as Ajna are one and the same. When the mind
rises there, the aspirant sees God. But still there is a barrier between
God and the devotee. It is like the barrier of glass in a lantern, which
keeps one from touching the light. King Janaka used to give instruction
about Brahmajnana from the fifth plane. Sometimes he dwelt on the fifth
plane, and sometimes on the sixth.

\"After passing the six centres the aspirant arrives at the seventh
plane. Reaching it, the mind merges in Brahman. The individual soul and
the Supreme Soul become one. The aspirant goes into samadhi. His
consciousness of the body disappears. He loses the knowledge of the
outer world. He does not see the manifold any more. His reasoning comes
to a stop.

\"Trailanga Swami once said that because a man reasons he is conscious
of multiplicity, of variety. Attaining samadhi, one gives up the body in
twenty-one days. Spiritual consciousness is not possible without the
awakening of the Kundalini.

\"A man who has realized God shows certain characteristics. He becomes
like a child or a madman, or an inert thing or a ghoul. Further, he is
firmly convinced that he is the machine and God is its Operator, that
God alone is the Doer and all others are His instruments. As some Sikh
devotees once said to me, even the leaf moves because of God\'s will.
One should be aware that everything happens by the will of Rāma. The
weaver said: \'The price of the cloth, by the will of Rāma, is one rupee
six annas. By the will of Rāma the robbery was committed. By the will of
Rāma the robbers were arrested. By the will of Rāma I too was arrested
by the police. And at last, by the will of Rāma, I was released.\' \"

It was dusk. Sri Ramakrishna had had no rest since his midday meal. He
had talked unceasingly to the devotees about God. At last the visitors
took their leave and went home.

**Friday, June 15, 1883**

It was a holiday on account of the Hindu religious festival Dasahara.
Among the devotees who visited Sri Ramakrishna at Dakshineswar that day
were Adhar, M., and Rākhāl \'s father. Rākhāl \'s father\'s
father-in-law was also present. All were seated on the floor of the
Master\'s room.

**Advice to householders**

Rākhāl \'s father\'s father-in-law was a devotee of God. He asked the
Master, \"Sir, can one realize God while leading the life of a
householder?\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Why not? Live in the world like a mudfish. The
mudfish lives in the mud but itself remains unstained. Or live in the
world like a loose woman. She attends to her household duties, but her
mind is always on her sweetheart. Do your duties in the world, fixing
your mind on God. But this is extremely difficult. I said to the members
of the Brahmo Samaj: \'Suppose a typhoid patient is kept in a room where

there are jars of pickles and pitchers of water. How can you expect the
patient to recover? The very thought of spiced pickles brings water to
one\'s mouth.\' To a man, woman is like that pickle. The craving for
worldly things, which is chronic in man, is like the patient\'s craving
for water. There is no end to this craving. The typhoid patient says,
\'I shall drink a whole pitcher of water.\' The situation is very
difficult. There is so much confusion in the world. If you go this way,
you are threatened with a shovel; if you go that way, you are threatened
with a broomstick; again, in another direction, you are threatened with
a shoe-beating. Besides, one cannot think of God unless one lives in
solitude. The goldsmith melts gold to make ornaments. But how can he do
his work well if he is disturbed again and again? Suppose you are
separating rice from bits of husk. You must do it all by yourself. Every
now and then you have to take the rice in your hand to see how clean it
is. But how can you do your work well if you are called away again and
again?\"

A DEVOTEE: \"What then is the way, sir?\"

MASTER: \"There is a way. One succeeds if one develops a strong spirit
of renunciation. Give up at once, with determination, what you know to
be unreal. Once, when I was seriously ill, I was taken to the physician
Gangaprasad Sen. He said to me: \'I shall give you a medicine, but you
mustn\'t drink any water. You may take pomegranate juice.\' Everyone
wondered how I could live without water; but I was determined not to
drink it. I said to myself: \'I am a paramahamsa and not a goose. I
shall drink only milk.\'

\"You have to spend a few days in solitude. If you but touch the
\'granny\' you are safe. Turn yourself into gold and then live wherever
you please. After realizing God and divine love in solitude one may live
in the world as well. (To Rākhāl \'s father) That is why I ask the
youngsters to stay with me; for they will develop love of God by staying
here a few days. After that they can very well lead the life of a
householder.\"

**Problem of good and evil**

DEVOTEE: \"If God is responsible for everything, then why should people
speak of good and evil, virtue and vice? One commits sin also by the
will of God, isn\'t that so?\"

ANOTHER DEVOTEE: \"How can we understand the will of God?\"

MASTER: \"There is no doubt that virtue and vice exist in the world; but
God Himself is unattached to them. There may be good and bad smells in
the air, but the air is not attached to them. The very nature of God\'s
creation is that good and evil, righteousness and unrighteousness, will
always exist in the world. Among the trees in the garden one finds mango
and jack-fruit, and hog plum too. Haven\'t you noticed that even wicked
men are needed? Suppose there are rough tenants on an estate; then the
landlord must send a ruffian to control them.\"

The conversation again turned to the life of the householder.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"You see, by leading a householder\'s life a
man needlessly dissipates his mental powers. The loss he thus incurs can
be made up if he takes to monastic life. The first birth is a gift of
the father; then comes the second birth, when one is invested with the
sacred thread. There is still another birth at the time of being
initiated into monastic life. The two obstacles to spiritual life are
\'woman\' and \'gold\'. Attachment to \'woman\' diverts one from the way
leading to God. Man doesn\'t know what it is that causes his downfall.
Once, while going to the Fort, I couldn\'t see at all that I was driving
down a sloping road; but when the carriage went inside the Fort, I
realized how far down I had come. Alas! Women keep men deluded. Captain
says, \'My wife is full of wisdom.\' The man possessed by a ghost does
not realize it. He says, \'Why, I am all right!\' \"

The devotees listened to these words in deep silence.

MASTER: \"It is not lust alone that one should be afraid of in the life
of the world. There is also anger. Anger arises when obstacles are
placed in the way of desire.\"

23. \"At meal-time, sometimes a cat stretches out its paw to take the
    fish from my plate. But I cannot show any resentment.\"

MASTER: \"Why? You may even beat it once in a while. What\'s the harm? A
worldly man should hiss, but he shouldn\'t pour out his venom. He
mustn\'t actually injure others. But he should make a show of anger to
protect himself from enemies. Otherwise they will injure him. But a
sannyasi need not even hiss.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"I find it is extremely difficult for a householder to
realize God. How few people can lead the life you prescribe for them! I
haven\'t found any.\"

MASTER: \"Why should that be so? I have heard of a deputy magistrate
named Pratap Singh. He is a great

man. He has many virtues: compassion and devotion to God. He meditates
on God. Once he sent for me.

Certainly there are people like him.

\"The practice of discipline is absolutely necessary. Why shouldn\'t a
man succeed if he practises sadhana? But he doesn\'t have to work hard
if he has real faith-faith in his guru\'s words. Once Vyasa was about to
cross the Jamuna, when the gopis also arrived there, wishing to go to
the other side. But no ferry-boat was in sight. They said to Vyasa,
\'Revered sir, what shall we do now?\' \'Don\'t worry\', said Vyasa. \'I
will take you across. But I am very hungry. Have you anything for me to
eat?\' The gopis had plenty of milk, cream, and butter with them. Vyasa
ate it all. Then the gopis asked, \'Well, sir, what about crossing the
river?\' Vyasa stood on the bank of the Jamuna and said, \'O Jamuna, if
I have not eaten anything today, then may your waters part so that we
may all walk to the other side.\' No sooner did the sage utter these
words than the waters of the Jamuna parted. The gopis were speechless
with wonder. \'He ate so much just now,\' they said to themselves, \'and
he says, \"If I have not eaten anything. . .\"!\' Vyasa had the firm
conviction that it was not himself, but the Narayana who dwelt in his
heart, that had partaken of the food.

\"Sankaracharya was a Brahmajnani, to be sure. But at the beginning he
too had the feeling of differentiation. He didn\'t have absolute faith
that everything in the world is Brahman. One day as he was coming out of
the Ganges after his bath, he saw an untouchable, a butcher, carrying a
load of meat. Inadvertently the butcher touched his body. Sankara
shouted angrily, \'Hey there! How dare you touch me?\' \'Revered sir,\'
said the butcher, \'I have not touched you, nor have you touched me. The
Pure Self cannot be the body nor the five elements nor the twenty-four
cosmic principles.\' Then Sankara came to his senses. Once Jadabharata
was carrying King Rahugana\'s palanquin and at the same time giving a
discourse on Self-Knowledge. The king got down from the palanquin and
said to Jadabharata, \'Who are you, pray?\' The latter answered, \'I am
Not this, not this-I am the Pure Self.\' He had perfect faith that he
was the Pure Self.

23. \'I am He\', \'I am the Pure Self\'-that is the conclusion of the
    jnanis. But the bhaktas say, \'The whole universe is the glory of
    God.\' Who would recognize a wealthy man without his power and
    riches? But it is quite different when God Himself, gratified by the
    aspirant\'s devotion, says to him, \'You are the same as Myself.\'
    Suppose a king is seated in his court, and his cook enters the hall,
    sits on the throne, and says, \'O King, you and I are the same!\'
    People will certainly call him a madman. But suppose one day the
    king, pleased with the cook\'s service, says to him: \'Come, sit
    beside me. There is nothing wrong in that. There is no difference
    between you and me.\' Then, if the cook sits on the throne with the
    king, there is no harm in it. It is not good for ordinary people to
    say, \'I am He\'. The waves belong to the water. Does the water
    belong to the waves?

**Result of yoga through bhakti**

\"The upshot of the whole thing is that, no matter what path you follow,
yoga is impossible unless the mind becomes quiet. The mind of a yogi is
under his control; he is not under the control of his mind. When the
mind is quiet the prana stops functioning. Then one gets kumbhaka. One
may have the same kumbhaka through bhaktiyoga as well; the prana stops
functioning through love of God too. In the kirtan the musician sings,
\'Nitai amar mata hati!\' Repeating this, he goes into a spiritual mood
and cannot sing the whole sentence. He simply sings, \'Hati! Hati\' When
the mood deepens he sings only, \'Ha! Ha!\' Thus his prana stops through
ecstasy, and kumbhaka follows.

\"Suppose a man is sweeping a courtyard with his broom, and another man
comes and says to him: \'Hello! So-and-so is no more. He is dead.\' Now,
if the dead person was not related to the sweeper, the latter goes on
with his work, remarking casually: \'Ah! That\'s too bad. He is dead. He
was a good fellow.\' The sweeping goes on all the same. But if the dead
man was his relative, then the broom drops from his hand. \'Ah!\' he
exclaims, and he too drops to the ground. His prana has stopped
functioning. He can neither work nor think. Haven\'t you noticed, among
women, that if one of them looks at something or listens to something in
speechless amazement, the other women say to her, \'What? Are you in
ecstasy?\' In this instance, too, the prana has stopped functioning, and
so she remains speechless, with mouth agape.

\"It will not do merely to repeat, \'I am He, I am He.\' There are
certain signs of a Jnāni. Narendra has big protruding eyes. (Pointing to
a devotee) He also has good eyes and forehead.

**Different classes of men**

\"All men are by no means on the same level. It is said that there are
four classes of men: the bound, the struggling, the liberated, and the
ever-free. It is also not a fact that all men have to practise spiritual
discipline. There are the ever-free and those who achieve perfection
through spiritual discipline. Some realize God after much spiritual
austerity, and some are perfect from their very birth. Prahlada is an
example of the ever-free.

\"Eternally perfect sages like Prahlada also practise meditation and
prayer. But they have realized the fruit, God-vision, even before their
spiritual practice. They are like gourds and pumpkins, which grow fruit
first and then flowers.

(Looking at Rākhāl \'s father) \"Even though an eternally perfect soul
is born in a low family, still he retains his innate perfection. He
cannot do anything else. A pea germinating in a heap of cow-dung still
grows into a pea-plant.

\"God has given to some greater power than to others. In one man you see
it as the light of a lamp, in another, as the light of a torch. One word
of Vidyasagar\'s revealed to me the utmost limit of his intelligence.
When I told him of the different manifestations of God\'s Power in
different beings, he said to me, \'Sir, has God then given greater power
to some than to others?\' At once I said: \'Yes, certainly He has; If
there are not different degrees of manifestation of His Power, then why
should your name be known far and wide? You see, we have come to you
after hearing of your knowledge and compassion. You haven\'t grown two
horns, have you?\' With all his fame and erudition, Vidyasagar said such
a childish thing as \'Has God given greater power to some than to
others?\' The truth is that when the fisherman draws his net, he first
catches big fish like trout and carp; then he stirs up the mud with his
feet, and small fish come out-minnows, mud-fish, and so on. So also,
unless a man knows God, \'minnows\' and the like gradually come out from
within him. What can one achieve through mere scholarship?\"

**Sunday, June 17, 1883**

Sri Ramakrishna was resting in his room in the temple garden at
Dakshineswar. It was afternoon. Adhar and M. arrived and saluted the
Master. A Tantrik devotee also came in. Rākhāl , Hazra, and Ramlal were
staying with Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"Why shouldn\'t one be able to attain
spirituality, living the life of a householder? But it is extremely
difficult. Sages like Janaka entered the world after attaining
Knowledge. But still the world is a place of terror. Even a detached
householder has to be careful. Once Janaka bent down his head at the
sight of a bhairavi. He shrank from seeing a woman. The bhairavi said to
him: \'Janaka, I see you have not yet attained Knowledge. You still
differentiate between man and woman.\'

\"If you move about in a room filled with soot, you will soil your body,
however slightly, no matter how clever you may be. I have seen
householder devotees filled with spiritual emotion while performing
their daily worship wearing their silk clothes. They maintain that
attitude even until they take their refreshments after the

worship. But afterwards they become their old selves again. They display
their rajasic and tamasic natures.

\"Sattva begets bhakti. Even bhakti has three aspects: sattva, rajas,
and tamas. The sattva of bhakti is pure sattva. When a devotee acquires
it he doesn\'t direct his mind to anything but God. He pays only as much
attention to his body as is absolutely necessary for its protection.

\"But a paramahamsa is beyond the three gunas. Though they exist in him,
yet they are practically non-existent. Like a child, he is not under the
control of any of the gunas. That is why paramahamsas allow small
children to come near them- in order to assume their nature.

\"Paramahamsas may not lay things up; but this rule does not apply to
householders. They must provide for their families.\"

TANTRIK DEVOTEE: \"Is a paramahamsa aware of virtue and vice?\"

MASTER: \"Keshab Sen also asked that question. I said to him, \'If I
explain that to you, then you won\'t be able to keep your society
together.\' \'In that case we had better stop here\', said Keshab.

\"Do you know the significance of virtue and vice? A paramahamsa sees
that it is God who gives us evil tendencies as well as good tendencies.
Haven\'t you noticed that there are both sweet and bitter fruits? Some
trees give sweet fruit, and some bitter or sour. God has made the
mango-tree, which yields sweet fruit, and also the hog plum, which
yields sour fruit.\"

TANTRIK: \"Yes, sir. That is true. On the hill-top one sees extensive
rose gardens, reaching as far as the eye can see.\"

MASTER: \"The paramahamsa realizes that all these-good and bad, virtue
and vice, real and unreal-are only the glories of God\'s maya. But these
are very deep thoughts. One realizing this cannot keep an organization
together or anything like that.\"

TANTRIK: \"But the law of karma exists, doesn\'t it?\"

MASTER: \"That also is true. Good produces good, and bad produces bad.
Don\'t you get the hot taste if you eat chillies? But these are all
God\'s lila, His play.\"

TANTRIK: \"Then what is the way for us? We shall have to reap the result
of our past karma, shall we not?\"

MASTER: \"That may be so. But it is different with the devotees of God.
Listen to a song:

> *O mind, you do not know how to farm!*
>
> *Fallow lies the field of your life.*
>
> *If you had only worked it well,*
>
> *How rich a harvest you might reap!*
>
> *Hedge it about with Kali\'s name*
>
> *If you would keep your harvest safe;*
>
> *This is the stoutest hedge of all,*
>
> *For Death himself cannot come near it.*
>
> *Sooner or later will dawn the day*
>
> *When you must forfeit your precious field;*
>
> *Gather, O mind, what fruit you may.*
>
> *Sow for your seed the holy name*
>
> *Of God that your guru has given to you,*
>
> *Faithfully watering it with love;*
>
> *And if you should find the task too hard,*
>
> *Call upon Ramprasad for help.*

He sang again:

> *I have securely blocked the way by which the King of Death will
> come;*
>
> *Henceforward all my doubts and fears are set at naught for ever.*
>
> *Siva Himself is standing guard at the nine doorways of my house,*
>
> *Which has one Pillar for support, and three ropes to secure it.*
>
> *The Lord has made His dwelling-place the thousand-petalled lotus
> flower*
>
> *Within the head, and comforts me with never-ceasing care.*

The Master continued: \"Anyone who dies in Benares, whether a brahmin or
a prostitute, will become Siva. When a man sheds tears at the name of
Hari, Kali, or Rāma, then he has no further need of the sandhya and
other rites. All actions drop away of themselves. The fruit of action
does not touch him.\"

Again the Master sang:

> *As is a man\'s meditation, so is his feeling of love;*
>
> *As is a man\'s feeling of love, so is his gain;*
>
> *And faith is the root of all.*
>
> *If in the Nectar Lake of Mother Kali\'s feet*
>
> *My mind remains immersed,*
>
> *Of little use are worship, oblations, or sacrifice.*

He sang another song:

> *Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas,*
>
> *So long as I can breathe my last with Kali\'s name upon my lips?..*

Then he said, \"When a man merges himself in God, he can no longer
retain wicked or sinful tendencies.\"

TANTRIK: \"You have said rightly that he keeps only the \'Knowledge
ego\'.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, he keeps only the \'Knowledge ego\', the \'devotee ego\',
the \'servant ego\', and the \'good ego\'. His \'wicked ego\'
disappears.\"

TANTRIK: \"Today you have destroyed many of our doubts.\"

MASTER: \"All doubts disappear when one realizes the Self.

\"Assume the tamasic aspect of bhakti. Say with force: \'What? I have
uttered the names of Rāma and Kali. How can I be in bondage any more?
How can I be affected by the law of karma?\' \"

The Master sang:

> *If only I can pass away repeating Durga\'s name,*
>
> *How canst Thou then, O Blessed One,*
>
> *Withhold from me deliverance,*
>
> *Wretched though I may be?*
>
> *I may have stolen a drink of wine, or killed a child unborn,*
>
> *Or slain a woman or a cow,*
>
> *Or even caused a brahmin\'s death;*
>
> *But, though it all be true,*
>
> *Nothing of this can make me feel the least uneasiness;*
>
> *For through the power of Thy sweet name*
>
> *My wretched soul may still aspire*
>
> *Even to Brahmanhood.*

The Master continued: \"Faith! Faith! Faith! Once a guru said to his
pupil, \'Rāma alone has become everything.\'

When a dog began to eat the pupil\'s bread, he said to it: \'O Rāma,
wait a little. I shall butter Your bread.\' Such was his faith in the
words of his guru.

\"Worthless people do not have any faith. They always doubt. But doubts
do not disappear completely till one realizes the Self.

\"In genuine love of God there is no desire. Only through such love does
one speedily realize God. Attainment of supernatural powers and so on-
these are desires. Krishna once said to Arjuna: \'Friend, you cannot
realize God if you acquire even one of the eight supernatural powers.
They will only add a little to your power.\' \"

TANTRIK: \"Sir, why don\'t the rituals of Tantra bear fruit nowadays?\"

MASTER: \"It is because people cannot practise them with absolute
correctness and devotion.\"

In conclusion the Master said: \"Love of God is the one essential thing.
A true lover of God has nothing to fear, nothing to worry about. He is
aware that the Divine Mother knows everything. The cat handles the mouse
one way, but its own kitten a very different way.\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 12**

THE FESTIVAL AT PĀNIHĀTI

> Monday, June 18, 1883

**Festival at Pānihāti**

SRI RAMAKRISHNA had been invited to the great religious festival at
Pānihāti, near Calcutta. This \"Festival of the Flattened Rice\" was
inaugurated by Raghunath Das, a disciple of Sri Chaitanya. It is said
that Raghunath used to run away from home, secretly practise his
devotions, and enjoy the bliss of spiritual ecstasy. One day Nityananda
said to him: \"Thief! You run away from home and enjoy the love of God
all alone. You hide it from us. I shall punish you today. You must
arrange a religious festival and entertain the devotees with flattened
rice.\" Since then the festival has been annually celebrated at Pānihāti
by the Vaishnavas. Thousands of the followers of Sri Chaitanya
participate in it. Its chief feature is the singing of the names and
glories of God, and the dancing of the devotees in religious fervour.
The centre of the festivity is the temple of Radha-Krishna, built on the
bank of the Ganges.

The Master had been invited to the festival by Mani Sen, who was the
custodian of the temple. Ram, M., Rākhāl , Bhavanath, and a few other
disciples went with the Master in a carriage. On his way to Pānihāti Sri
Ramakrishna was in a light mood and joked with the youngsters. But as
soon as the carriage reached the place of the festival, the Master, to
the utter amazement of\' the devotees, shot into the crowd. He joined
the kirtan party of Navadvip Goswami, Mani Sen\'s guru, and danced,
totally forgetting the world. Every now and then he stood still in
samādhi, carefully supported by Navadvip Goswami for fear he might fall
to the ground. Thousands of devotees were gathered together for the
festival. Wherever one looked there was a forest of human heads. The
crowd seemed to become infected by the Master\'s divine fervour and
swayed to and fro, chanting the name of God, until the very air seemed
to reverberate with it. Drums, cymbals, and other instruments produced
melodious sounds. The atmosphere became intense with spiritual fervour.
The devotees felt that Gaurānga himself was being manifested in the
person of Sri Ramakrishna. Flowers were showered from all sides on his
feet and head. The shouting of the name of Hari was heard even at a
distance, like the rumbling of the ocean.

Sri Ramakrishna entered by turn into all the moods of ecstasy. In deep
samādhi he stood still, his face radiating a divine glow. In the state
of partial consciousness he danced, sometimes gently and sometimes with
the vigour of a lion. Again, regaining consciousness of the world, he
sang, himself leading the chorus:

> *Behold, the two brothers have come, who weep while chanting Hari\'s
> name,*
>
> *The brothers who dance in ecstasy and make the world dance in His
> name!*
>
> *Behold them, weeping themselves, and making the whole world weep as
> well,*
>
> *The brothers who, in return for blows, offer to sinners Hari\'s
> love.*
>
> *Behold them, drunk with Hari\'s love, who make the world drunk as
> well!*
>
> *Behold, the two brothers have come, who once were Kanai and Balai of
> Braja,*
>
> *They who would steal the butter out of the pots of the gopi maids.*
>
> *Behold, the two have come, who shatter all the rules of caste,*
>
> *Embracing everyone as brother, even the outcaste shunned by men;*
>
> *Who lose themselves in Hari\'s name, making the whole world mad;*
>
> *Who are none other than Hari Himself, and chant His hallowed name!*
>
> *Behold them,who saved from their sinful ways the ruffians Jagai and
> Madhai,*
>
> *They who cannot distinguish between a friend and an enemy!*
>
> *Behold the two brothers, Gaur and Nitai, who come again to save
> mankind.*

Again the Master sang:

> *See how all Nadia is shaking*
>
> *Under the waves of Gaurānga\'s love! . . .*

The crowd, with the Master in the centre, surged toward the temple of
Radha-Krishna. Only a small number could enter. The rest stood outside
the portal and jostled with one another to have a look at Sri
Ramakrishna. In a mood of intoxication he began to dance in the
courtyard of the shrine. Every now and then his body stood transfixed in
deep samādhi. Hundreds of people around him shouted the name of God, and
thousands outside caught the strain and raised the cry with
full-throated voices. The echo travelled over the Ganges, striking a
note in the hearts of people in the boats on the holy river, and they
too chanted the name of God.

When the kirtan was over, Mani Sen took Sri Ramakrishna and Navadvip
Goswami into a room and served them with refreshments. Afterwards Ram,
M., and the other devotees were also served with the prasad.

In the afternoon, the Master was sitting in Mani Sen\'s drawing-room
with the devotees. Navadvip was also near him. Mani offered the carriage
hire to Sri Ramakrishna. Pointing to Ram and the others, the Master
said: \"Why should they accept it from you? They earn money.\" He became
engaged in conversation with Navadvip.

**Different states of bhakti**

MASTER: \"Bhakti matured becomes bhava. Next is mahabhava, then prema,
and last of all is the attainment of God. Gaurānga experienced the
states of mahabhava and prema. When prema is awakened, a devotee
completely forgets the world; he also forgets his body, which is so dear
to a man. Gaurānga experienced prema. He jumped into the ocean, thinking
it to be the Jamuna. The ordinary jiva does not experience mahabhava or
prema. He goes only as far as bhava. But Gaurānga experienced all three
states. Isn\'t that so?\"

NAVADVIP: \"Yes, sir, that is true. The inmost state, the semi-conscious
state, and the conscious state.\"

MASTER: \"In the inmost state he would remain in samādhi, unconscious of
the outer world. In the semi-conscious state he could only dance. In the
conscious state he chanted the name of God.\"

Navadvip introduced his son to the Master. The young man was a student
of the scriptures. He saluted Sri Ramakrishna.

NAVADVIP: \"He studies the scriptures at home. Previously one hardly saw
a copy of the Vedas in this country. Max Muller has translated them; so
people can now read these books.\"

**Essence of the scriptures**

MASTER: \"Too much study of the scriptures does more harm than good. The
important thing is to know the essence of the scriptures. After that,
what is the need of books? One should learn the essence and then dive
deep in order to realize God.

**Ideal of the Gitā**

\"The Divine Mother has revealed to me the essence of the Vedānta. It is
that Brahman alone is real and the world illusory. The essence of the
Gitā is what you get by repeating the word ten times. The word becomes
reversed. It is then \'tagi\', which refers to renunciation. The essence
of the Gitā is: \'O man, renounce everything and practise spiritual
discipline for the realization of God.\' \"

NAVADVIP: \"But how can we persuade our minds to renounce?\"

MASTER: \"You are a goswami. It is your duty to officiate as priest in
the temple. You cannot renounce the world; otherwise, who would look
after the temple and its services? You have to renounce mentally.

\"It is God Himself who has kept you in the world to set an example to
men. You may resolve in your mind a

thousand times to renounce the world, but you will not succeed. God has
given you such a nature that you must perform your worldly duties.

\"Krishna said to Arjuna: \'What do you mean, you will not fight? By
your mere will you cannot desist from fighting. Your very nature will
make you fight.\' \"

At the mere mention of Krishna and Arjuna the Master went into samādhi.
In the twinkling of an eye his body became motionless and his eyeballs
transfixed, while his breathing could scarcely be noticed. At this
sudden transformation Navadvip and his son and the other devotees looked
at the Master in mute wonder.

Regaining partial consciousness, he said to Navadvip: \"Yoga and bhoga.
You goswamis have both. Now your only duty is to call on God and pray to
Him sincerely: \'O God, I don\'t want the glories of Thy
world-bewitching maya. I want Thee alone!\' God dwells in all beings,
undoubtedly. That being the case, who may be called His devotee? He who
dwells in God, he who has merged his mind and life and innermost soul in
God.\"

The Master returned to the sense plane. Referring to his samādhi, he
said to Navadvip: \"Some say that this state of mine is a disease. I say
to them, \'How can one become unconscious by thinking of Him whose
Consciousness has made the whole world conscious?\' \"

Mani Sen said good-bye to the invited brahmins and Vaishnavas with
suitable gifts of money. He offered five rupees to Sri Ramakrishna. The
latter said that he could not possibly accept any money. But Mani
insisted. The Master then asked him in the name of his guru not to press
him. Mani requested him again to accept the offering. Sri Ramakrishna
asked M., in a distressed voice, whether he should take the money. The
disciple made a vehement protest and said, \"No, sir. By no means.\"

Friends of Mani Sen gave the money to Rākhāl , requesting him to buy
some mangoes and sweets for the Master. Sri Ramakrishna said to M.: \"I
have definitely said to Mani that I would not accept the money. I feel
free now. But Rākhāl has accepted it. His is now the responsibility.\"

Sri Ramakrishna, accompanied by the devotees, took a carriage to return
to Dakshineswar. They were going to pass the temple garden of Mati Seal
on the way. For a long time the Master had been asking M. to take him to
the reservoir in the garden in order that he might teach him how to
meditate on the formless God. There were tame fish in the reservoir.
Nobody harmed them. Visitors threw puffed rice and other bits of food
into the water, and the big fish came in swarms to eat the food.
Fearlessly the fish swam in the water and sported there joyously.

Coming to the reservoir, the Master said to M.: \"Look at the fish.
Meditating on the formless God is like swimming joyfully like these
fish, in the Ocean of Bliss and Consciousness.\"

**Monday, June 25, 1883**

Sri Ramakrishna was at Balarām Bose\'s house in Calcutta. Rākhāl and M.
were seated near him. The Master was in ecstasy. He conversed with the
devotees in an abstracted mood.

MASTER: \"Let me assure you that a man can realize his Inner Self
through sincere prayer. But to the extent that he has the desire to
enjoy worldly objects, his vision of the Self becomes obstructed.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. You always ask us to plunge into God.\"

MASTER (joyously): \"Yes! That\'s it. Let me tell you that the
realization of Self is possible for all, without any exception.\"

23. \"That is true, sir. But God is the Doer. He works through different
    beings in different ways, according to their capacity to manifest
    the Divine. God gives to some full spiritual consciousness, and
    others He keeps in ignorance.\"

MASTER: \"No, that is not so. One should pray to God with a longing
heart. God certainly listens to prayer if it is sincere. There is no
doubt about it.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Yes, sir. There is this \'I-consciousness\' in us;
therefore we must pray.\"

**Nitya and Lila**

MASTER (to M.): \"A man should reach the Nitya, the Absolute, by
following the trail of the Lila, the Relative. It is like reaching the
roof by the stairs. After realizing the Absolute, he should climb down
to the Relative and live on that plane in the company of devotees,
charging his mind with the love of God. This is my final and most mature
opinion.

\"God has different forms, and He sports in different ways. He sports as
Isvara, deva, man, and the universe. In every age He descends to earth
in human form, as an Incarnation, to teach people love and devotion.
There is the instance of Chaitanya. One can taste devotion and love of
God only through His Incarnations. Infinite are the ways of God\'s play,
but what I need is love and devotion. I want only the milk. The milk
comes through the udder of the cow. The Incarnation is the udder.\"

Was Sri Ramakrislma hinting that he was an Incarnation of God? Did he
suggest that those who saw him saw God? Did he thus speak about himself
when speaking of Chaitanya?

It was a hot day in June 1883. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the steps
of the Śiva temples in the temple garden. M. arrived with ice and other
offerings and sat down on the steps after saluting the Master.

MASTER (to M.): \"The husband of Mani Mallick\'s granddaughter was here.
He read in a book that God could not be said to be quite wise and
omniscient; otherwise, why should there be so much misery in the world?
As regards death, it would be much better to kill a man all at once,
instead of putting him through slow torture. Further, the author writes
that if he himself were the Creator, he would have created a better
world.\"

M. listened to these words in surprise and made no comment.

**The ways of God are inscrutable**

MASTER (to M.): \"Can a man ever understand God\'s ways? I too think of
God sometimes as good and sometimes as bad. He has kept us deluded by
His great illusion. Sometimes He wakes us up and sometimes He keeps us
unconscious. One moment the ignorance disappears, and the next moment it
covers our mind. If you throw a brick-bat into a pond covered with moss,
you get a glimpse of the water. But a few moments later the moss comes
dancing back and covers the water.

**Body-consciousness produces duality**

\"One is aware of pleasure and pain, birth and death, disease and grief,
as long as one is identified with the body. All these belong to the body
alone, and not to the Soul. After the death of the body, perhaps God
carries one to a better place. It is like the birth of the child after
the pain of delivery. Attaining Self-Knowledge, one looks on pleasure
and pain, birth and death, as a dream.

\"How little we know! Can a one-seer pot hold ten seers of milk? If ever
a salt doll ventures into the ocean to measure its depth, it cannot come
back and give us the information. It melts into the water and
disappears.\"

At dusk the evening service began in the different temples. The Master
was sitting on the small couch in his room, absorbed in contemplation of
the Divine Mother. Several devotees also were there. M. was going to
spend the night with the Master.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna began to talk to a devotee privately, on
the verandah north of his room. He said: \"It is good to meditate in the
small hours of the morning and at dawn. One should also meditate daily
after dusk.\" He instructed the devotee about meditation on the Personal
God and on the Impersonal Reality.

After a time he sat on the semicircular porch west of his room. It was
about nine o\'clock.

MASTER: \"Those who come here will certainly have all their doubts
removed. What do you say?\"

M: \"That is true, sir.\"

A boat was moving in the Ganges, far away from the bank. The boatman
began to sing. The sound of his voice floating over the river reached
the Master\'s ears, and he went into a spiritual mood. The hair on his
body stood on end. He said to M., \"Just feel my body.\" M. was greatly
amazed. He thought: \"The Upanishads describe Brahman as permeating the
universe and the ether. Has that Brahman, as sound, touched the
Master\'s body?\"

After a time Sri Ramakrishna began to converse again.

MASTER: \"Those who come here must have been born with good tendencies.
Isn\'t that true?\"

M: \"It is true, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Adhar must have good tendencies.\"

M: \"That goes without saying.\"

MASTER: \"A guileless man easily realizes God. There are two paths: the
path of righteousness and the path of wickedness. One should follow the
path of righteousness.\"

23. \"That is true, sir. If a thread has a single fibre sticking out, it
    cannot pass through the eye of a needle.\" MASTER: \"If a man finds
    a hair in the food he is chewing, he spits out the entire morsel.\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
23. \"But you say that the man who has realized God cannot be injured by
    evil company. A blazing fire burns up even a plantain-tree.\"

**Saturday, July 14, 1883**

Sri Ramakrishna arrived at Adhar\'s house in Calcutta. Rākhāl , M., and
other devotees were with the Master.

Adhar had arranged to have Rajnarayan, the famous singer, and his party,
recite the Chandi.

Rajnarayan began the recital in the worship hall. He sang:

> *I have surrendered my soul at the fearless feet of the Mother; Am I
> afraid of Death any more? . . .*

As the Master listened, he became filled with divine fervour and joined
the musicians. Now and then he improvised an appropriate line. Suddenly
he went into samādhi and stood still.

The singer sang again:

> *Who is the Woman yonder who lights the field of battle? Darker Her
> body gleams even than the darkest storm-cloud, And from Her teeth
> there flash the lightning\'s blinding flames! Dishevelled Her hair is
> flying behind as She rushes about, Undaunted in this war between the
> gods and the demons. Laughing Her terrible laugh, She slays the
> fleeing asuras, And with Her dazzling flashes She bares the horror of
> war. How beautiful on Her brow the drops of moisture appear! About Her
> dense black hair the bees are buzzing in swarms; The moon has veiled
> its face, beholding this Sea of Beauty.*
>
> *Tell me, who can She be, this Sorceress? Wonder of wonders! Śiva
> Himself, like a corpse, lies vanquished at Her feet. Kamalakanta has
> guessed who She is, with the elephant\'s gait; She is none other than
> Kāli, Mother of all the worlds. Sri Ramakrishna was in deep samādhi.*

**Saturday, July 21, 1883**

It was about four o\'clock in the afternoon when Sri Ramakrishna, with
Ramlal and one or two other devotees, started from Dakshineswar for
Calcutta in a carriage. As the carriage passed the gate of the Kāli
temple, they met M. coming on foot with four mangoes in his hand. The
carriage stopped and M. saluted the Master. Sri Ramakrishna was going to
visit some of his devotees in Calcutta.

MASTER (to M., with a smile): \"Come with us. We are going to Adhar\'s
house.\"

M. got joyfully into the carriage. Having received an English education,
he did not believe in the tendencies inherited from previous births. But
he had admitted a few days before that it was on account of Adhar\'s
good tendencies from past births that he showed such great devotion to
the Master. Later on he had thought about this subject and had
discovered that he was not yet completely convinced about inherited
tendencies. He had come to Dakshineswar that day to discuss the matter
with Sri Ramakrishna.

MASTER: \"Well, what do you think of Adhar?\"

M: \"He has great yearning for God.\"

MASTER: \"Adhar, too, speaks very highly of you.\"

M. remained silent awhile and then began to speak of past tendencies.

M: \"I haven\'t much faith in rebirth and inherited tendencies. Will
that in any way injure my devotion to God?\"

**Everything is possible for God**

MASTER: \"It is enough to believe that all is possible in God\'s
creation. Never allow the thought to cross your mind that your ideas are
the only true ones, and that those of others are false. Then God will
explain everything.

\"What can a man understand of God\'s activities? The facets of God\'s
creation are infinite. I do not try to understand God\'s actions at all.
I have heard that everything is possible in God\'s creation, and I
always bear that in mind. Therefore I do not give a thought to the
world, but meditate on God alone. Once Hanuman was asked, \'What day of
the lunar month is it?\' Hanuman said: \'I don\'t know anything about
the day of the month, the position of the moon and stars, or any such
things. I think of Rāma alone.\'

\"Can one ever understand the work of God? He is so near; still it is
not possible for us to know Him. Balarama did not realize that Krishna
was God.\"

M: \"That is true, sir.\"

**Maya is the cause of ignorance**

MASTER: \"God has covered all with His maya. He doesn\'t let us know
anything. Maya is \'woman and gold\'. He who puts maya aside to see God,
can see Him. Once, when I was explaining God\'s actions to someone, God
suddenly showed me the lake at Kamarpukur. I saw a man removing the
green scum and drinking the water. The water was clear as crystal. God
revealed to me that Satchidananda is covered by the scum of maya. He who
puts the green scum aside can drink the water.

\"Let me tell you a very secret experience. Once I had entered the wood
near the pine-grove, and was sitting

there, when I had a vision of something like the hidden door of a
chamber. I couldn\'t see the inside of the chamber. I tried to bore a
hole in the door with a nail-knife, but did not succeed. As I bored, the
earth fell back into the hole and filled it. Then suddenly I made a very
big opening.\"

Uttering these words, the Master remained silent. After a time he said:
\"These are very profound words. I feel as if someone were pressing my
mouth. . . . I have seen with my own eyes that God dwells even in the
sexual organ. I saw Him once in the sexual intercourse of a dog and a
bitch.

\"The universe is conscious on account of the Consciousness of God.
Sometimes I find that this Consciousness wriggles about, as it were,
even in small fish.\"

The carriage came to the crossing at Shovabazar in Calcutta. The Master
continued, saying, \"Sometimes I find that the universe is saturated
with the Consciousness of God, as the earth is soaked with water in the
rainy season.

\"Well, I see so many visions, but I never feel vain about them.\"

M. (with a smile): \"That you should speak of vanity, sir!\"

MASTER: \"Upon my word, I don\'t feel vanity even in the slightest
degree.\"

23. \"There once lived a man in Greece, Socrates by name. A voice from
    heaven said that he was wise among men. Socrates was amazed at this
    revelation. He meditated on it a long time in solitude and then
    realized its significance. He said to his friends, \'I alone of all
    people have understood that I do not know anything.\' But every man
    believes he is wise. In reality all are ignorant.\"

MASTER: \"Now and then I think, \'What is it I know that makes so many
people come to me?\' Vaishnavcharan

was a great pundit. He used to say to me: \'I can find in the scriptures
all the things you talk about. But do you know why I come to you? I come
to hear them from your mouth.\' \"

23. \"All your words tally with the scriptures. Navadvip Goswami also
    said that the other day at the festival at Pānihāti. You told us
    that day that by repeating the word \'Gitā\' a number of times one
    reverses it and it becomes \'tagi\', which refers to renunciation.
    Renunciation is the essence of the Gitā. Navadvip Goswami supported
    your statement from the grammatical standpoint.\"

MASTER: \"Have you found anyone else resembling me-any pundit or holy
man?\"

23. \"God has created you with His own hands, whereas He has made others
    by machine. All others He has created according to law.\"

MASTER (laughing, to Ramlal and the other devotees): \"Listen to what he
is saying!\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughed for some time, and said at last. \"Really and
truly I have no pride-no, not even the slightest bit.\"

23. \"Knowledge does us good in one respect at least; it makes us feel
    that we do not know anything, that we are nothing.\"

MASTER: \"Right you are! I am nothing. I am nobody. \"Do you believe in
English astronomy?\"

23. \"It is possible to make new discoveries by applying the laws of
    Western astronomy. Observing the irregular movement of Uranus, the
    astronomers looked through their telescopes and discovered Neptune
    shining in the sky. They can also foretell eclipses.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, that is so.\"

**Master\'s visits to various devotees**

The carriage drove on. They were approaching Adhar\'s house. Sri
Ramakrishna said to M., \"Dwell in the truth and you will certainly
realize God.\"

23. \"You said the other day to Navadvip Goswami:\'O God, I want Thee.
    Please do not delude me with Thy world-bewitching maya. I want to
    realize Thee.\' \"

MASTER: \"Yes, one should be able to say that from one\'s innermost
soul.\"

Sri Ramakrishna arrived at Adhar\'s house and took a seat in the
parlour. Ramlal, Adhar, M., and the other devotees sat near him. Rākhāl
was staying with his father in Calcutta.

MASTER (to Adhar): \" Didn\'t you let Rākhāl know that I was coming?\"

ADHAR: \"Yes, sir. I have sent him word.\"

Finding that the Master was eager to see Rākhāl , Adhar at once sent his
carriage to fetch him. Adhar had been yearning to see the Master that
day, but he had not definitely known that Sri Ramakrishna was coming.

ADHAR: \"You haven\'t been here for a long time. I prayed to God today
that you might come. I even shed tears\"

The Master was pleased and said with a smile, \"You don\'t mean that!\"

It was dusk and the lamps were lighted. Sri Ramakrishna saluted the
Divine Mother with folded hands and sat quietly absorbed in meditation.
Then he began to chant the names of God in his sweet voice: \"Govinda!
Govinda! Satchidananda! Hari! Hari!\" Every word he uttered showered
nectar on the ears of the devotees.

Ramlal sang in praise of Kāli, the Divine Mother:

> *Thy name, I have heard, O Consort of Śiva, is the destroyer of our
> fear,*
>
> *And so on Thee I cast my burden: Save me! Save me, O kindly Mother!*
>
> *Out of Thy womb the world is born, and Thou it is that dost pervade
> it.*
>
> *Art Thou Kāli? Art Thou Radha? Who can ever rightly say?*
>
> *Mother, in every living creature Thou dost have Thy dwelling place;*
>
> *As Kundalini Thou dost live in the lotus of the Muladhara.*
>
> *Above it lies the Svadhisthana, where the four-petalled lotus
> blooms;*
>
> *There also Thou dost make Thy home, O mystic power of Kundalini,*
>
> *In the four petals of that flower, and in Vajrasana\'s six petals*
>
> *At the navel is Manipura, the blue ten-petalled lotus flower;*
>
> *Through the pathway of Sushumna, Thou dost ascend and enter there.*
>
> *O Lady of the lotuses, in lotus blossoms Thou dost dwell!*
>
> *Beyond them lies the Lake of Nectar, in the region of the heart,*
>
> *Where the twelve-petalled lotus flower enchants the eye with scarlet
> flame.*
>
> *When Thou dost open it, O Mother, touching it with Thy Lotus Feet,*
>
> *The age-long darkness of the heart instantly scatters at Thy sight.*
>
> *Above, in the throat, is the sixteen-petalled lotus flower, of smoky
> hue;*
>
> *Within the petals of this flower there lies concealed a subtle
> space,*
>
> *Transcending which, one sees at length the universe in Space
> dissolve.*
>
> *And higher yet, between the eyebrows, blossoms the lotus of two
> petals,*
>
> *Where the mind of man remains a prisoner and past controlling;*
>
> *From this flower the mind desires to watch the sportive play of
> life.*
>
> *Highest of all, within the head, the soul-enthralling centre is,*
>
> *Where shines the thousand-petalled lotus, Mahadeva\'s dwelling
> place.*
>
> *Having ascended to His throne, O Spouse of Śiva, sit beside Him!*
>
> *Thou art the Primal Power, O Mother! She whose senses are
> controlled;*
>
> *The yogis meditate on Thee as Uma, great Himalaya\'s daughter.*
>
> *Thou who art the Power of Śiva! Put to death my ceaseless cravings;*
>
> *Grant that I never fall again into the ocean of this world.*
>
> *Mother, Thou art the Primal Power, Thou the five cosmic principles;*
>
> *Who can ever hope to know Thee, who art beyond all principles?*
>
> *Only for Thy bhaktas\' sake dost Thou assume Thy various forms;*
>
> *But when Thy devotee\'s five senses merge in the five elements,*
>
> *Mother, it is Thyself alone that he beholds as formless Truth.*

As Ramlal sang the lines:

> *Above, in the throat, is the sixteen-petalled lotus flower, of smoky
> hue;*
>
> *Within the petals of this flower there lies concealed a subtle
> space,*
>
> *Transcending which, one sees at length the universe in Space
> dissolve,*

The Master said to M.: \"Listen. This is known as the vision of
Satchidananda, the Formless Brahman. The Kundalini, rising above the
Visuddha chakra, enables one to see everything as Ākāśa.\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"One attains the Absolute by going beyond the universe and its
created beings conjured up by maya. By passing beyond the Nada one goes
into samādhi. By repeating \'Om\' one goes beyond the Nada and attains
samādhi.\"

Adhar served Sri Ramakrishna with fruits and sweets. The Master left for
Jadu Mallick\'s house.

Sri Ramakrishna entered the room in Jadu\'s house where the Divine
Mother was worshipped. He stood before the image, which had been
decorated with flowers, garlands, and sandal-paste, and which radiated a
heavenly beauty and splendour. Lights were burning before the pedestal.
A priest was seated before the image. The Master asked one of his
companions to offer a rupee in the shrine, according to the Hindu
custom.

Sri Ramakrishna stood a long time with folded hands before the blissful
image, the devotees standing behind him. Gradually he went into samādhi,
his body becoming motionless and his eyes fixed.

With a long sigh he came back to the world of the \"Mother, good-bye.\"
But he could not leave the place. said: \"Please sing that song. Then I
shall be all right.\"

Ramlal sang:

senses and said, still intoxicated with divine fervour, He remained
standing there. Addressing Ramlal, he

> *O Mother, Consort of Śiva, Thou hast deluded this world. . . .*

The Master went to the drawing-room with the devotees. Every now and
then he said, \"O Mother, please dwell in my heart.\" Jadu was sitting
in the drawing-room with his friends. The Master sat down, still in an
ecstatic mood, and sang:

> *O Mother, ever blissful as Thou art,*
>
> *Do not deprive Thy worthless child of bliss! . . .*

Finishing the song, he said to Jadu, still in a state of divine fervour:
\"Well, sir, what shall I sing? Shall I sing \'Mother, am I Thine
eight-months child\'? \"

He sang:

> *Mother, am I Thine eight-months child? Thy red eyes cannot frighten
> me!*
>
> *My riches are Thy Lotus Feet, which Śiva holds upon His breast;*
>
> *Yet, when I seek my heritage, I meet with excuses and delays.*
>
> *A deed of gift I hold in my heart, attested by Thy Husband Śiva;*
>
> *I shall sue Thee, if I must, and with a single point shall win.*
>
> *If Thou dost oppose me, Thou wilt learn what sort of mother\'s son I
> am.*
>
> *This bitterly contested suit between the Mother and Her son-*
>
> *What sport it is! says Ramprasad. I shall not cease tormenting Thee*
>
> *Till Thou Thyself, shalt yield the fight and take me in Thine arms at
> last.*

Coming down nearly to a normal state, the Master said, \"I shall take
some of the Divine Mother\'s prasad.\" Then he ate a little of it.

Jadu Mallick was sitting near him with several friends, among whom were
a few of his flatterers.

MASTER (with a smile): \"Well, why do you keep these buffoons with
you?\"

JADU (with a smile): \"Suppose they are. Won\'t you redeem them?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"The water of the Ganges cannot purify a wine-jar.\"

Jadu had promised the Master that he would arrange a recital of the
Chandi in his house. Some time had elapsed, but he had not yet kept his
promise.

MASTER: \"Well, what about the recital of the Chandi?\"

JADU: \"I have been busy with many things; I haven\'t been able to
arrange it.\"

MASTER: \"How is that? A man gives his word and doesn\'t take it back!
\'The words of a man are like the tusks

of the elephant: they come out but do not go back.\' A man must be true
to his word. What do you say?\"

JADU (with a smile): \"You are right.\"

MASTER: \"You are a shrewd man. You do a thing after much calculation.
You are like the brahmin who selects a cow that eats very little,
supplies plenty of dung, and gives much milk.\" (All laugh.)

After a time he said to Jadu: \"I now understand your nature. It is half
warm and half cold. You are devoted to God and also to the world.\"

The Master and his devotees were served by Jadu with sweets and fruit,
and then the party left for the home of Khelat Ghosh.

Khelat Ghosh\'s house was a big mansion, but it looked deserted. As the
Master entered the house he fell into an ecstatic mood. M., Ramlal, and
a few other devotees were with him. Their host was Khelat Ghosh\'s
brother-in-law. He was an old man, a Vaishnava. His body was stamped
with the name of God, according to the Vaishnava custom, and he carried
in his hand a small bag containing his rosary. He had visited the
Master, now and then, at Dakshineswar. But most of the Vaishnavas held
narrow religious views; they criticized the Vedantists and the followers
of the Śiva cult. Sri Ramakrishna soon began to speak.

**Dogmatism condemned**

MASTER: \"It is not good to feel that one\'s own religion alone is true
and all others are false. God is one only,

and not two. Different people call on Him by different names: some as
Allah, some as God, and others as Krishna, Śiva, and Brahman. It is like
the water in a lake. Some drink it at one place and call it \'jal\',
others at another place and call it \'pani\', and still others at a
third place and call it \'water\'. The Hindus call it \'jal\', the
Christians \'water\', and the Mussalmans \'pani\'. But it is one and the
same thing. Opinions are but paths. Each

religion is only a path leading to God, as rivers come from different
directions and ultimately become one in the one ocean.

**Oneness of God**

\"The Truth established in the Vedas, the Puranas, and the Tantras is
but one Satchidananda. In the Vedas It is called Brahman, in the Puranas
It is called Krishna, Rāma, and so on, and in the Tantras It is called
Śiva. The one Satchidananda is called Brahman, Krishna, and Śiva.\"

The devotees were silent.

A VAISHNAVA DEVOTEE: \"Sir, why should one think of God at all\"

MASTER: \"If a man really has that knowledge, then he is indeed
liberated though living in a body.

**Shallow faith of the worldly-minded**

\"Not all, by any means, believe in God. They simply talk. The
worldly-minded have heard from someone that God exists and that
everything happens by His will; but it is not their inner belief.

\"Do you know what a worldly man\'s idea of God is like? It is like the
children\'s swearing by God when they quarrel. They have heard the word
while listening to their elderly aunts quarreling.

\"Is it possible for all to comprehend God? God has created the good and
the bad, the devoted and the impious, the faithful and the sceptical.
The wonders that we see all exist in His creation. In one place there is
more manifestation of His Power, in another less. The sun\'s light is
better reflected by water than by earth, and still better by a mirror.
Again, there are different levels among the devotees of God: superior,
mediocre, and inferior. All this has been described in the Gitā.\"

VAISHNAVA: \"True, sir.\"

**Various classes of devotees**

MASTER: \"The inferior devotee says, \'God exists, but He is very far
off, up there in heaven.\' The mediocre devotee says, \'God exists in
all beings as life and consciousness.\' The superior devotee says: \'It
is God Himself who has become everything; whatever I see is only a form
of God. It is He alone who has become maya, the universe, and all living
beings. Nothing exists but God.\' \"

VAISHNAVA: \"Does anyone ever attain that state of mind?\"

**Signs of God-vision**

MASTER: \"One cannot attain it unless one has seen God. But there are
signs that a man has had the vision of

God. A man who has seen God sometimes behaves like a madman: he laughs,
weeps, dances, and sings. Sometimes he behaves like a child, a child
five years old-guileless, generous, without vanity, unattached to
anything, not under the control of any of the gunas, always blissful.
Sometimes he behaves like a ghoul: he doesn\'t differentiate between
things pure and things impure; he sees no difference between things
clean and things unclean. And sometimes he is like an inert thing,
staring vacantly: he cannot do any work; he cannot strive for
anything.\"

Was the Master making a veiled reference to his own states of mind?

**Knowledge and ignorance**

MASTER (to the Vaishnava devotee): \"The feeling of \'Thee and Thine\'
is the outcome of Knowledge; \'I and

mine\' comes from ignorance. Knowledge makes one feel: \'O God, Thou art
the Doer and I am Thy instrument.

O God, to Thee belongs all-body, mind, house, family, living beings, and
the universe. All these are Thine. Nothing belongs to me.\'

\"An ignorant person says, \'Oh, God is there-very far off.\' The man of
Knowledge knows that God is right here, very near, in the heart; that He
has assumed all forms and dwells in all hearts as their Inner
Controller.\"

**Sunday, July 22, 1883**

Taking advantage of the holiday, many householder devotees visited Sri
Ramakrishna in his room at the Dakshineswar temple garden. The Young
devotees, mostly students, generally came on week-days. Sometimes the
Master asked his intimate disciples to come on a Tuesday or a Saturday,
days that he considered very auspicious for special religious
instruction. Adhar, Rākhāl , and M. had come from Calcutta in a hired
carriage.

Sri Ramakrishna had enjoyed a little rest after his midday meal. The
room had an atmosphere of purity and holiness. On the walls hung
pictures of gods and goddesses, among them one of Christ rescuing the
drowning Peter. Outside the room were plants laden with fragrant
flowers, and the Ganges could be seen flowing toward the south. The
Master was seated on the small couch, facing the north, and the devotees
sat on mats and carpets spread on the floor. All eyes were directed
toward him. Mani Mallick, an old Brahmo devotee about sixty-five years
of age, came to pay his respects to the Master. He had returned a few
months earlier from a pilgrimage to Benares and was recounting his
experiences to Sri Ramakrishna.

**Difficulty of the Vedantic method**

MANI MALLICK: \"A monk whom I met in Benares said that no religious
experience is possible without the control of the sense-organs. Nothing
could be achieved by merely crying, \'God! God!\' \"

MASTER: \"Do you understand the views of teachers like him? According to
them, one must first practise spiritual discipline: self-restraint,
self-control, forbearance, and the like. Their aim is to attain Nirvāna.
They are followers of Vedānta. They constantly discriminate, saying,
\'Brahman alone is real, and the world illusory.\' But this is an
extremely difficult path. If the world is illusory, then you too are
illusory. The teacher who gives the instruction is equally illusory. His
words, too, are as illusory as a dream.

\"But this experience is beyond the reach of the ordinary man. Do you
know what it is like? If you burn camphor nothing remains. When wood is
burnt at least a little ash is left. Finally, after the last analysis,
the devotee goes into samādhi. Then he knows nothing whatsoever of
\'I\', \'you\', or the universe.

\"Padmalochan was a man of deep wisdom. He had great respect for me,
though at that time I constantly repeated the name of the Divine Mother.
He was the court pundit of the Maharaja of Burdwan. Once he came to
Calcutta and went to live in a garden house near kamarhati. I felt a
desire to see him and sent Hriday there to learn if the pundit had any
vanity. I was told that he had none. Then I met him. Though a man of
great knowledge and scholarship, he began to weep on hearing me sing
Ramprasad\'s devotional songs. We talked together a long while;
conversation with nobody else gave me such satisfaction. He said to me,
\'Give up the desire for the company of devotees; otherwise people of
all sorts will come to you and make you deviate from your spiritual
ideal.\' Once he entered into a controversy, by correspondence, with
Utshavananda, Vaishnavcharan\'s guru. He told me an interesting
incident. Once a meeting was called to decide which of the two deities,
Śiva or Brahma, was the greater. Unable to come to any decision, the
pundits at last referred the matter to Padmalochan. With characteristic
guilelessness he said: \'How do I know? Neither I nor any of my
ancestors back to the fourteenth generation have seen Śiva or Brahma.\'
About the renunciation of \'woman and gold\', he said to me one day:
\'Why have you given up those things? Such distinctions as \"This is
money and that is clay\" are the outcome of ignorance.\' What could I
say to that? I replied: \'I don\'t know all these things, my dear sir.
But for my part, I cannot relish such things as money and the like.\'

\"There was a pundit who was tremendously vain. He did not believe in
the forms of God. But who can understand the inscrutable ways of the
Divine? God revealed Himself to him as the Primal Power. This vision
made the pundit unconscious for a long time. After regaining partial
consciousness he uttered only the sound \'Ka! Ka! Ka!\' He could not
fully pronounce \'Kāli\'.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, you met Pundit Vidyasagar. What did you think of
him?\"

MASTER: \"Vidyasagar has both scholarship and charity, but he lacks
inner vision. Gold lies hidden within him. Had he but found it out, his
activities would have been reduced; finally they would have stopped
altogether. Had he but known that God resides in his heart, his mind
would have been directed to God in thought and meditation. Some persons
must perform selfless work a long time before they can practise
dispassion and direct their minds to the spiritual ideal and at last be
absorbed in God.

**Charity and attachment**

\"The activities that Vidyasagar is engaged in are good. Charity is very
noble. There is a great deal of difference between daya, compassion, and
maya, attachment. Daya is good, but not maya. Maya is love for one\'s
relatives-one\'s wife, children, brother, sister, nephew, father, and
mother. But daya is the same love for all created beings without any
distinction.\"

M: \"Is daya also a bondage?\"

**The three gunas**

MASTER: \"Yes, it is. But that concept is something far beyond the
ordinary man. Daya springs from sattva. Sattva preserves, rajas creates,
and tamas destroys. But Brahman is beyond the three gunas. It is beyond
Prakriti.

\"None of the three gunas can reach Truth; they are like robbers, who
cannot come to a public place for fear of being arrested. Sattva, rajas,
and tamas are like so many robbers.

\"Listen to a story. Once a man was going through a forest, when three
robbers fell upon him and robbed him of all his possessions. One of the
robbers said, \'What\'s the use of keeping this man alive?\' So saying,
he was about to kill him with his sword, when the second robber
interrupted him, saying: \'Oh, no! What is the use of killing him? Tie
him hand and foot and leave him here.\' The robbers bound his hands and
feet and went away.

After a while the third robber returned and said to the man: \'Ah, I am
sorry. Are you hurt? I will release you

from your bonds.\' After setting the man free, the thief said: \'Come
with me. I will take you to the public

highway.\' After a long time they reached the road. Then the robber
said: \'Follow this road. Over there is your house.\' At this the man
said: \'Sir, you have been very good to me. Come with me to my house \'
\'Oh, no!\' the robber replied. \'I can\'t go there. The police will
know it.\'

This world itself is the forest. The three robbers prowling here are
sattva, rajas, and tamas. It is they that rob a man of the Knowledge of
Truth. Tamas wants to destroy him. Rajas binds him to the world. But
sattva rescues him from the clutches of rajas and tamas. Under the
protection of sattva, man is rescued from anger, passion, and the other
evil effects of tamas. Further, sattva loosens the bonds of the world.
But sattva also is a robber. It cannot give him the ultimate Knowledge
of Truth, though it shows him the road leading to the Supreme Abode of
God. Setting him on the path, sattva tells him: \'Look yonder. There is
your home.\' Even sattva is far away from the Knowledge of Brahman.

**Nature of Brahman cannot he described**

\"What Brahman is cannot be described. Even he who knows It cannot talk
about It. There is a saying that a boat, once reaching the \'black
waters\' of the ocean, cannot come back.

**Parable of the four friends**

\"Once four friends, in the course of a walk, saw a place enclosed by a
wall. The wall was very high. They all became eager to know what was
inside. One of them climbed to the top of the wall. What he saw on
looking inside made him speechless with wonder. He only cried,\'Ah!
Ah!\' and dropped in. He could not give any information about what he
saw. The others, too, climbed the wall, uttered the same cry, \'Ah!
Ah!\', and jumped in. Now who could tell what was inside?

\"Sages like Jadabharata and Dattatreya, after realizing Brahman, could
not describe It. A man\'s \'I\' completely disappears when he goes into
samādhi after attaining the Knowledge of Brahman. That is why Ramprasad
sang, addressing his mind:

If you should find the task too hard, Call upon Ramprasad for help.

The mind must completely merge itself in Knowledge. But that is not
enough. \'Ramprasad\', that is, the principle of \'I\', must vanish too.
Then alone does one get the Knowledge of Brahman.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, is it possible then that Sukadeva did not have the
ultimate Knowledge?\"

MASTER: \"According to some people, Sukadeva only saw and touched the
Ocean of Brahman; he did not dive into It. That is why he could return
to the world and impart religious instruction. According to others, he
returned to the world of name and form, after attaining the Knowledge of
Brahman, for the purpose of teaching others. He had to recite the
Bhagavata to King Parikshit and had to teach people in various ways;
therefore God did not destroy his \'I\' altogether. God kept in him the
\'ego of Knowledge.\' \"

**God and religious organization**

DEVOTEE: \"Can one keep up an organization after attaining the Knowledge
of Brahman?\"

MASTER: \"Once I talked to Keshab Sen about the Knowledge of Brahman. He
asked me to explain it further. I said, \'If I proceed further, then you
won\'t be able to preserve your organization and following.\' \'Then
please stop here!\' replied Keshab. (All laugh.) But still I said to
Keshab: \' \"I\" and \"mine\" indicate ignorance. Without ignorance one
cannot have such a feeling as \"I am the doer; these are my wife,
children, possessions, name

+---+------------------+-------+-----+----------+----------------------+
| a | > fame\".\'      | >     | one |          |                      |
| n | > Thereupon      | said, | g   |          |                      |
| d | > Keshab         | > \   | ave |          |                      |
|   |                  | 'Sir, | up  |          |                      |
|   |                  | > if  | the |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | \"I |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | \", |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | n   |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | oth |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | ing |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | w   |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | hat |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | soe |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | ver |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | wo  |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | uld |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | rem |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | ain |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | .\' |          |                      |
|   |                  |       | I   |          |                      |
+---+------------------+-------+-----+----------+----------------------+
| r |                  |       |     | > up all | You should give up   |
| e |                  |       |     | > of the | only the \"unripe    |
| a |                  |       |     | > \"I\". |                      |
| s |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| s |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| u |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| r |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| e |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| d |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| h |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| i |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| m |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| a |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| n |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| d |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| s |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| a |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| i |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| d |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| : |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| \ |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| ' |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| I |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| a |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| m |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| n |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| o |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| t |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| a |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| s |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| k |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| i |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| n |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| g |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| y |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| o |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| u |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| t |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| o |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| g |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| i |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| v |                  |       |     |          |                      |
| e |                  |       |     |          |                      |
+---+------------------+-------+-----+----------+----------------------+
| I | > The \"unripe   | >     | the | > These  | wife and children. I |
| \ | > I\" makes one  | feel: | do  | > are my | am a teacher.\"      |
| " |                  | > \"I | er. |          |                      |
| . |                  | > am  |     |          |                      |
+---+------------------+-------+-----+----------+----------------------+

Renounce this. \"unripe I\" and keep the \"ripe I\", which will make you
feel that you are the servant of God, His devotee, and that God is the
Doer and you are His instrument.\' \"

DEVOTEE: \"Can the \'ripe I\' form an organization?\"

**Two kinds of ego**

MASTER: \"I said to Keshab Sen that the \'I\' that says, \'I am a
leader, I have formed this party, I am teaching people\', is the
\'unripe I\'. It is very difficult to preach religion. It is not
possible to do so without receiving the commandment of God. The
permission of God is necessary. Sukadeva had a command from God to
recite the Bhagavata. If, after realizing God, a man gets His command
and becomes a preacher or teacher, then that preaching or teaching does
no harm. His \'I\' is not \'unripe\'; it is \'ripe\'.

\"I asked Keshab to give up this \'unripe I\'. The ego that feels, \'I
am the servant of God and lover of God\' does not injure one. I said to
him: \'You have been constantly talking of your organization and your
followers. But people also go away from your organization.\' Keshab
answered: \'It is true, sir. After staying in it several years, people
go to another organization. What is worse, on deserting me they abuse me
right and left.\' \'Why don\'t you study their nature?\' I said. \'Is
there any good in making anybody and everybody a disciple?\'

\"I said to Keshab further: \'You should accept the Divine Mother, the
Primal Energy. Brahman is not different from Its Śakti. What is Brahman
is also Śakti. As long as a man remains conscious of the body, he is
conscious of duality. It is only when a man tries to describe what he
sees that he finds duality.\' Keshab later on recognized Kāli.

\"One day when Keshab was here with his disciples, I said to him that I
would like to hear him preach. He delivered a lecture in the chandni.
Then we all sat by the bathing-ghat and had a long conversation. I said
to him: \'It is Bhagavan alone who in one form appears as bhakta, and in
another as the Bhagavata. Please repeat \"Bhagavata-Bhakta-Bhagavan\".\'
Keshab and his disciples repeated the words. Then I asked him to

repeat \'Guru-Krishna-Vaishnava\'. Thereupon Keshab said: \'Sir, I
should not go so far now. People will say that I have become an orthodox
Hindu.\'

\"It is extremely difficult to go beyond the three gunas. One cannot
reach that state without having realized God. Man dwells in the realm of
maya. Maya does not permit him to see God. It has made him a victim of
ignorance.

**Man\'s inordinate attachment**

\"Once Hriday brought a bull-calf here. I saw, one day, that he had tied
it with a rope in the garden, so that it might graze there. I asked him,
\'Hriday, why do you tie the calf there every day?\' \'Uncle,\' he said,
\'I am going to send this calf to our village. When it grows strong I
shall yoke it to the plough.\' As soon as I heard these words I was
stunned to think: \'How inscrutable is the play of the divine maya!
Kamarpukur and Sihore are so far away from Calcutta! This poor calf must
go all that way. Then it will grow, and at length it will be yoked to
the plough. This is indeed the world! This is indeed maya!\' I fell down
unconscious. Only after a long time did I regain consciousness.\"

It was three or four o\'clock in the afternoon. M. found Sri Ramakrishna
seated on the couch in an abstracted mood. After some time he heard him
talking to the Divine Mother. The Master said, \"O Mother, why hast Thou
given him only a particle?\" Remaining silent a few moments, he added:
\"I understand it, Mother. That little bit will be enough for him and
will serve Thy purpose. That little bit will enable him to teach
people.\"

Did the Master thus transmit spiritual powers to his disciples? Did he
thus come to know that his disciples, after him, would go out into the
world as teachers of men?

Rākhāl was in the room. Sri Ramakrishna was still in a state of partial
consciousness when he said to Rākhāl

23. \"You were angry with me, weren\'t you? Do you know why I made you
    angry? There was a reason. Only then would the medicine work. The
    surgeon first brings an abscess to a head. Only then does he apply a
    herb so that it may burst and dry up.\"

After a pause he went on: \"Yes, I have found Hazra to be like a piece
of dry wood. Then why does he live here? This has a meaning too. The
play is enlivened by the presence of trouble-makers like Jatila and
Kutila.

(To M.) \"One must accept the forms of God. Do you know the meaning of
the image of Jagaddhatri? She is the Bearer of the Universe. Without her
support and protection the universe would fall from its place and be
destroyed. The Divine Mother, Jagaddhatri, reveals Herself in the heart
of one who can control the mind, which may be compared to an elephant.\"

RĀKHĀL : \"The mind is a mad elephant.\"

MASTER: \"Therefore the lion, the carrier of the Divine Mother, keeps it
under control.\"

It was dusk. The evening service began in the temples. Sri Ramakrishna
was chanting the names of the gods and goddesses. He was seated on the
small couch, with folded hands, and became absorbed in contemplation of
the Divine Mother. The world outside was flooded with moonlight, and the
devotees inside the Master\'s room sat in silence and looked at his
serene face.

In the mean time Govinda of Belgharia and some of his friends had
entered the room. Sri Ramakrishna was still in a semi-conscious state.
After a few minutes he said to the devotees: \"Tell me your doubts. I
shall explain everything.\"

Govinda and the other devotees looked thoughtful.

**Black complexion of the Divine Mother**

GOVINDA: \"Revered sir, why does the Divine Mother have a black
complexion?\"

MASTER: \"You see Her as black because you are far away from Her. Go
near and you will find Her devoid of all colour. The water of a lake
appears black from a distance. Go near and take the water in your hand,
and you will see that it has no colour at all. Similarly, the sky looks
blue from a distance. But look at the atmosphere near you; it has no
colour. The nearer you come to God, the more you will realize that He
has neither name nor form. If you move away from the Divine Mother, you
will find Her blue, like the grass-flower. Is Syama male or female? A
man once saw the image of the Divine Mother wearing a sacred thread. He
said to the worshipper: \'What? You have put the sacred thread on the
Mother\'s neck!\' The worshipper said: \'Brother, I see that you have
truly known the Mother. But I have not yet been able to find out whether
She is male or female; that is why I have put the sacred thread on Her
image.\'

\"That which is Syama is also Brahman. That which has form, again, is
without form. That which has attributes, again, has no attributes.
Brahman is Śakti; Śakti is Brahman. They are not two. These are only two
aspects, male and female, of the same Reality, Existence-Knowledge-Bliss
Absolute.\"

GOVINDA: \"What is the meaning of \'yogamaya\'?\"

MASTER: \"It signifies the yoga, or union, of Purusha and Prakriti.
Whatever you perceive in the universe is the outcome of this union. Take
the image of Śiva and Kāli. Kāli stands on the bosom of Śiva; Śiva lies
under Her feet like a corpse; Kāli looks at Śiva. All this denotes the
union of Purusha and Prakriti. Purusha is inactive; therefore Śiva lies
on the ground like a corpse. Prakriti performs all Her activities in
conjunction with Purusha. Thus She creates, preserves, and destroys.
That is also the meaning of the conjoined images of Radha and Krishna.
On account of that union, again, the images are slightly inclined toward
each other.

\"To denote this union, Sri Krishna wears a pearl in His nose, Radha a
blue stone in hers. Radha has a fair complexion, bright as the pearl.
Sri Krishna\'s is blue. For this reason Radha wears the blue stone.
Further, Krishna\'s apparel is yellow, and Radha\'s blue.

\"Who is the best devotee of God? It is he who sees, after the
realization of Brahman, that God alone has become all living beings, the
universe, and the twenty-four cosmic principles. One must discriminate
at first, saying \'Not this, not this\', and reach the roof. After that
one realizes that the steps are made of the same materials as the roof,
namely, brick, lime, and brick-dust. The devotee realizes that it is
Brahman alone that has become all these-the living beings, the universe,
and so on.

\"Mere dry reasoning-I spit on it! I have no use for it! (The Master
spits on the ground.)

\"Why should I make myself dry through mere reasoning? May I have
unalloyed love for the Lotus Feet of God as long as the consciousness of
\'I\' and \'you\' remains with me!

(To Govinda) \"Sometimes I say, \'Thou art verily I, and I am verily
Thou.\' Again I feel, \'Thou art Thou.\' Then I do not find any trace of
\'I\'. It is Śakti alone that becomes flesh as God Incarnate. According
to one school of thought, Rāma and Krishna are but two waves in the
Ocean of Absolute Bliss and Consciousness.

**Seeing God in everything**

\"Chaitanya, Consciousness, is awakened after Advaita-jnāna, the
Knowledge of the non-dual Brahman. Then one perceives that God alone
exists in all beings as Consciousness. After this realization comes
Ānanda, Bliss. Advaita, Chaitanya, and Nityananda.

(to M.) \"Let me ask you not to disbelieve in the forms of God. Have
faith in God\'s forms. Meditate on that form of God which appeals to
your mind.

(To Govinda) \"The fact is that one does not feel the longing to know or
see God as long as one wants to enjoy worldly objects. The child forgets
everything when he plays with his toys. Try to cajole him away from play
with a sweetmeat; you will not succeed. He will eat only a bit of it.
When he relishes neither the sweetmeat nor his play, then he says, \'I
want to go to my mother.\' He doesn\'t care for the sweetmeat any more.
If a

man whom he doesn\'t know and has never seen says to the child, \'Come
along; I shall take you to your mother\', the child follows him. The
child will go with anyone who will carry him to his mother.

The soul becomes restless for God when one is through with the enjoyment
of worldly things. Then a person has only one thought-how to realize
God. He listens to whatever anyone says to him about God.\"

M. (to himself): \"Alas! The soul becomes restless for God only when one
is through with the enjoyment of worldly things.\"

August 18, 1883

**Mystery of Divine Incarnation**

Sri Ramakrishna was at Balarām Bose\'s house in Calcutta. He was
explaining the mystery of Divine Incarnation to the devotees.

MASTER: \"In order to bring people spiritual knowledge, an Incarnation
of God lives in the world in the company of devotees, cherishing an
attitude of love for God. It is like going up and coming down the stairs
after having once reached the roof. In order to reach the roof, other
people should follow the path of devotion, as long as they have not
attained Knowledge and become free of desire. The roof can be reached
only when all desires are done away with. The shopkeeper does not go to
bed before finishing his accounts. He goes to sleep only when his
accounts are finished.

(To M.) \"A man will certainly succeed if he will take the plunge.
Success is sure for such a man.

\"Well, what do you think of the worship conducted by Keshab, Shivanath,
and the other Brahmo leaders?\"

23. \"They are satisfied, as you say, with describing the garden, but
    they seldom speak of seeing the Master of the garden. Describing the
    garden is the beginning and end of their worship.\"

MASTER: \"You are right. Our only duty is to seek the Master of the
garden and speak to Him. The only purpose of life is to realize God.\"

Sri Ramakrishna then went to Adhar\'s house. After dusk he sang and
danced in Adhar\'s drawing-room. M., Rākhāl , and other devotees were
present. After the music he sat down, still in an ecstatic mood. He said
to Rākhāl : \"This religious fervour is not like rain in the rainy
season, which comes in torrents and goes in torrents. It is like an
image of Śiva that has not been set up by human hands but is a natural
one that has sprung up, as it were, from the bowels of the earth. The
other day you left Dakshineswar in a temper. I prayed to the Divine
Mother to forgive you.\"

The Master was still in an abstracted mood and said to Adhar, \"My son,
meditate on the Deity whose name you chanted.\" With these words he
touched Adhar\'s tongue with his finger and wrote something on it. Did
the Master thereby impart spirituality to Adhar?

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 13**

THE MASTER AND M.

> August 19, 1883

IT WAS SUNDAY, the first day after the full moon. Sri Ramakrishna was
resting after his noon meal. The midday offering had been made in the
temples, and the temple doors were closed.

In the early afternoon the Master sat up on the small couch in his room.
M. prostrated himself before him and sat on the floor. The Master was
talking to him on the philosophy of Vedānta.

**Householders and Non-dualism**

MASTER (to M.): \"Self-Knowledge is discussed in the Ashtāvakra Samhitā.
The non-dualists say, \'Soham\', that is, \'I am the Supreme Self.\'
This is the view of the sannyasis of the Vedantic school. But this is
not the right attitude for householders, who are conscious of doing
everything themselves. That being so, how can they declare, \'I am That,
the actionless Supreme Self\'? According to the non-dualists the Self is
unattached. Good and bad, virtue and vice, and the other pairs of
opposites, cannot in any way injure the Self, though they undoubtedly
afflict those who have identified themselves with their bodies. Smoke
soils the wall, certainly, but it cannot in any way affect Ākāśa, space.
Following the Vedantists of this class, Krishnakishore used to say, \'I
am Kha\', meaning Ākāśa. Being a great devotee, he could say that with
some justification; but it is not becoming for others to do so.

\"But to feel that one is a free soul is very good. By constantly
repeating, \'I am free, I am free\', a man verily becomes free. On the
other hand, by constantly repeating, \'I am bound, I am bound\', he
certainly becomes bound to worldliness. The fool who says only, \'I am a
sinner, I am a sinner\', verily drowns himself in worldliness. One
should rather say: I have chanted the name of God. How can I be a
sinner? How can I be bound?\'

(To M.) \"You see, I am very much depressed today. Hriday has written me
that he is very ill. Why should I feel dejected about it? Is it because
of maya or daya?\"

M. could not find suitable words for a reply, and remained silent.

**Maya and compassion**

MASTER: \"Do you know what maya is? It is attachment to
relatives-parents, brother and sister, wife and children, nephew and
niece. Daya means love for all created beings. Now what is this, my
feeling about Hriday? Is it maya or daya? But Hriday did so much for me:
he served me whole-heartedly and nursed me when I was ill. But later he
tormented me also. The torment became so unbearable that once I was
about to commit suicide by jumping into the Ganges from the top of the
embankment. But he did much to serve me. Now my mind will be at rest if
he gets some money. But whom shall I ask for it? Who likes to speak
about such things to our rich visitors?\"

At two or three o\'clock in the afternoon Adhar Sen and Balarām arrived.
After saluting Sri Ramakrishna, they sat on the floor and asked him if
he was well. The Master said, \"Yes, I am well physically, but a little
troubled in mind.\" He did not refer to Hriday and his troubles.

**The conversation turned to the Goddess Simhavahini.**

MASTER: \"Yes, I visited the Goddess. She is worshipped by one of the
branches of the Mallick family of Calcutta. This branch of the family is
now in straitened circumstances, and the house they live in is
dilapidated. The walls and floor are spotted with moss and
pigeon-droppings, and the cement and plaster are crumbling. But other
branches of the Mallick family are well off. This branch has no signs of
prosperity. (To M.) Well, what does that signify?\"

M. remained silent.

MASTER: \"The thing is that everyone must reap the result of his
past-karma. One must admit the influence of tendencies inherited from
past births and the result of the prarabdha karma. Nevertheless, in that
dilapidated house I saw the face of the Goddess radiating a divine
light. One must believe in the Divine Presence in the image.

\"Once I went to Vishnupur. The raja of that place has several fine
temples. In one of them there is an image of the Divine Mother, called
Mrinmai.1 There are several lakes near the temple, known as the
Lalbandh, Krishnabandh, and so on. In the water of one of the lakes I
could smell the ointments that women use for their hair. How do you
explain that? I didn\'t know at that time that the woman devotees offer
ointments to the Goddess Mrinmayi while visiting Her temple. Near the
lake I went into samādhi, though I had not yet seen the image in the
temple. In that state I saw the divine form from the waist up, rising
from the water.\"

In the mean time other devotees had arrived. Someone referred to the
political revolution and civil war in Kabul. A devotee said that Yakub
Khan, the Amir of Afghanistan, had been deposed. He told the Master that
the Amir was a great devotee of God.

**Pleasure and pain are characteristics of physical life**

MASTER: \"But you must remember that pleasure and pain are the
characteristics of the embodied state. In Kavi Kankan\'s Chandi it is
written that Kaluvir was sent to prison and a heavy stone placed on his
chest. Yet Kalu was born as a result of a boon from the Divine Mother of
the Universe. Thus pleasure and pain are inevitable when the soul
accepts a body. Again, take the case of Srimanta, who was a great
devotee. Though his mother, Khullana, was very much devoted to the
Divine Mother, there was no end to his troubles. He was almost beheaded.
There is also the instance of the wood-cutter who was a great lover of
the Divine Mother. She appeared before him and showed him much grace and
love; but he had to continue his profession of wood-cutting and earn his
livelihood by that arduous work. Again, while Devaki, Krishna\'s mother,
was in prison, she had a vision of God Himself endowed with four hands,
holding mace, discus, conch-shell, and lotus. But with all that she
couldn\'t get out of prison.\"

23. \"Why speak only of getting out of prison? This body is the source
    of all our troubles. Devaki should have been freed from the body.\"

**Law of karma**

MASTER: \"The truth is that one must reap the result of the prarabdha
karma. The body remains as long as the results of past actions do not
completely wear away. Once a blind man bathed in the Ganges and as a
result was freed from his sins. But his blindness remained all the same.
(All laugh.) It was because of his evil deeds in his past birth that he
had to undergo that affliction.\"

M: \"Yes,sir. The arrow that has already left the bow is beyond our
control.\"

MASTER: \"However much a bhakta may experience physical joy and sorrow,
he always has knowledge and the treasure of divine love. This treasure
never leaves him. Take the Pandava brothers for instance. Though they
suffered so many calamities, they did not lose their God-Consciousness
even once. Where can you find men like them, endowed with so much
knowledge and devotion?\"

Just then Narendra and Colonel Viswanath Upadhyaya entered the room.
Narendra was then twenty-two years old and studying in college. They
saluted the Master and sat down. The Master requested Narendra to sing.
The Tānpura hung on the west wall of the room. The devotees fixed their
eyes on Narendra as he began to tune the drums.

MASTER (to Narendra): \"The drums don\'t sound as well as before.\"

CAPTAIN: \"They are now full. Therefore they are quiet, like a vessel
filled with water. Or they are like a holy man, who remains silent when
his heart is full of God-Consciousness.\"

MASTER: \"But what about sages like Nārada?\"

CAPTAIN: \"They talked because they were moved by the sufferings of
others.\"

MASTER: \"You are right. After attaining samādhi, Nārada, Sukadeva, and
others came down a few steps, as it were, to the plane of normal
consciousness and broke their silence out of compassion for the
sufferings of others and to help them.\"

Narendra began to sing:

> *Oh, when will dawn for me that day of blessedness*
>
> *When He who is all Good, all Beauty, and all Truth,*
>
> *Will light the inmost shrine of my heart?*
>
> *When shall I sink at last, ever beholding Him,*
>
> *Into that Ocean of Delight? . . .*

No sooner had the Master heard a few words of the song than he went into
deep samādhi. He sat with folded hands, facing the east. His body was
erect and his mind completely bereft of worldly consciousness. His
breath had almost stopped. With unwinking eyes he sat motionless as a
picture on a canvas. His mind had dived deep into the Ocean of God\'s
Beauty.

Narendra left the room and went to the east verandah, where Hazra was
seated on a blanket, with a rosary in his hand. They fell to talking.
Other devotees arrived. The Master came down from samādhi and looked
around. He could not find Narendra. The Tānpura was lying on the floor.
He noticed that the earnest eyes of the devotees were riveted on him.

MASTER (referring to Narendra): \"He has lighted the fire. Now it
doesn\'t matter whether he stays in the room or goes out.

**Joy of God-Consciousness**

(To Captain and the other devotees) \"Attribute to yourselves the bliss
of God-Consciousness; then you too will experience ineffable joy. The
bliss of God-Consciousness always exists in you. It is only hidden by
the veiling and projecting power of maya. The less you are attached to
the world, the more you love God.\"

CAPTAIN: \"The farther you proceed toward your home in Calcutta, the
farther you leave Benares behind. Again, the farther you proceed toward
Benares, the farther behind you leave your home.\"

MASTER: \"As Radha advanced toward Krishna, she could smell more and
more of the sweet fragrance of His body. The nearer you approach to God,
the more you feel His love. As the river approaches the ocean it
increasingly feels the flow of the tides.

**Ideals of Jnāni and bhakta**

\"The Jnāni experiences God-Consciousness within himself; it is like the
upper Ganges, flowing in only one direction. To him the whole universe
is illusory, like a dream; he is always established in the Reality of
Self. But with the lover of God the case is different. His feeling does
not flow in only one direction. He feels both the ebb-tide and the
flood-tide of divine emotion. He laughs and weeps and dances and sings
in the ecstasy of God. The lover of God likes to sport with Him. In the
Ocean of God-Consciousness he sometimes swims, sometimes goes down, and
sometimes rises to the surface-like pieces of ice in the water.
(Laughter.)

**Brahman and Śakti are not different**

\"The Jnāni seeks to realize Brahman. But the ideal of the bhakta is the
Personal God-a God endowed with omnipotence and with the six treasures.
Yet Brahman and Śakti are, in fact, not different. That which is the
Blissful Mother is, again, Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. They are
like the gem and its lustre. When one speaks of the lustre of the gem,
one thinks of the gem; and again, when one speaks of the gem, one refers
to its lustre. One cannot conceive of the lustre of the gem without
thinking of the gem, and one cannot conceive of the gem without thinking
of its lustre.

\"Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute is one, and one only. But It is
associated with different limiting adjuncts on account of the different
degrees of Its manifestation. That is why one finds various forms of
God. The devotee sings, \'O my Divine Mother, Thou art all these!\'
Wherever you see actions, like creation, preservation, and dissolution,
there is the manifestation of Śakti. Water is water whether it is calm
or full of waves and bubbles. The Absolute alone is the Primordial
Energy, which creates, preserves, and destroys. Thus it is the same
\'Captain\', whether he remains inactive or performs his worship or pays
a visit to the Governor General. Only we designate him by different
names at different times.\"

CAPTAIN: \"Yes, sir, that is so.\"

MASTER: \"I said those words to Keshab Sen.\"

CAPTAIN: \"Keshab is not an orthodox Hindu. He adopts manners and
customs according to his own whim. He is a well-to-do gentleman and not
a holy man.\"

MASTER (to the other devotees): \"Captain forbids me to go to see
Keshab.\"

CAPTAIN: \"But, sir, you act as you will. What can I do?\"

MASTER (sharply): \"Why shouldn\'t I go to see Keshab? You feel at ease
when you go to the Governor General\'s house, and for money at that.
Keshab thinks of God and chants His name. Isn\'t it you who are always
saying that God Himself has become the universe and all its living
beings? Doesn\'t God dwell in Keshab also?\"

With these words the Master left the room abruptly and went to the
northeast verandah. Captain and the other devotees remained, waiting for
his return. M. accompanied the Master to the verandah, where Narendra
was talking with Hazra. Sri Ramakrishna knew that Hazra always indulged
in dry philosophical discussions. Hazra would say: \"The world is
unreal, like a dream. Worship, food offerings to the Deity, and so
forth, are only hallucinations of the mind. The aim of spiritual life is
to meditate on one\'s own real Self.\" Then he would repeat, \"I am
He.\" But, with all that, he had a soft corner in his heart for money,
material things, and people\'s attention.

Sri Ramakrishna smiled and said to Hazra and Narendra, \"Hello! What are
you talking about?\"

NARENDRA (smiling): \"Oh, we are discussing a great many things. They
are rather too deep for others.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"But Pure Knowledge and Pure Love are one and
the same thing. Both lead the aspirants to the same goal. The path of
love is much the easier.\"

Narendra quoted a song:

> *O Mother, make me mad with Thy love!*
>
> *What need have I of knowledge or reason?*

Narendra said to M. that he had been reading a book by Hamilton, who
wrote: \"A learned ignorance is the end

of philosophy and the beginning of religion.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"What does that mean?\"

Narendra explained the sentence in Bengali. The Master beamed with joy
and said in English, \"Thank you! Thank you!\" Everyone laughed at the
charming way he said these words. They knew that his English vocabulary
consisted of only half a dozen words.

It was almost dusk when most of the devotees, including Narendra, took
leave of the Master. Sri Ramakrishna went out and looked at the Ganges
for a few minutes from the west porch. Two priests were bathing in
preparation for the evening worship. Young men of the village were
strolling in the garden or standing on the concrete embankment, gazing
at the murmuring river. Others, perhaps more thoughtful, were walking
about in the solitude of the Panchavati.

It became dark. The maidservant lighted the lamp in Sri Ramakrishna\'s
room and burnt incense. The evening worship began in the twelve temples
of Śiva and in the shrines of Krishna and Kāli.

As it was the first day after the full moon, the moonlight soon flooded
the tops of the trees and temples, and touched with silver the
numberless waves of the sacred river.

The Master returned to his room. After bowing to the Divine Mother, he
clapped his hands and chanted the sweet names of God. A number of holy
pictures hung on the walls of the room. Among others, there were
pictures of Dhruva, Prahlada, Kāli, Radha-Krishna, and the coronation of
Rāma. The Master bowed low before the pictures and repeated the holy
names. Then he repeated the holy words, \"Brahma-Ātmā-Bhagavan;
Bhagavata-Bhakta-Bhagavan; Brahma-Śakti, Śakti-Brahma; Veda, Purana,
Tantra, Gitā, Gayatri.\" Then he said: \"I have taken refuge at Thy
feet, O Divine Mother; not I, but Thou. I am the machine and Thou art
the Operator\", and so on.

**Master extols Narendra**

While the Master was meditating in this fashion on the Divine Mother, a
few devotees, coming in from the garden, gathered in his room. Sri
Ramakrishna sat down on the small couch. He said to the devotees:
\"Narendra, Bhavanath, Rākhāl , and devotees like them belong to the
group of the nityasiddhas; they are eternally free. Religious practice
on their part is superfluous. Look at Narendra. He doesn\'t care about
anyone. One day he was going with me in Captain\'s carriage. Captain
wanted him to take a good seat, but Narendra didn\'t even look at him.
He is independent even of me. He doesn\'t tell me all he knows, lest I
should praise his scholarship before others. He is free from ignorance
and delusion. He has no bonds. He is a great soul. He has many good
qualities. He is expert in music, both as a singer and player, and is
also a versatile scholar. Again, he keeps his passions under control and
says that he will never marry. There is a close friendship between
Narendra and Bhavanath; they are just like man and woman. Narendra
doesn\'t come here very often. That is good, for I am overwhelmed by his
presence.\"

**Monday, August 20, 1883**

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on his bed, inside the mosquito net,
meditating. It was about eight o\'clock in the evening. M. was sitting
on the floor with his friend Hari Babu. Hari, a young man of
twenty-eight, had lost his wife about eleven years before and had not
married a second time. He was much, devoted to his parents, brothers,
and sisters.

Hazra was living at Dakshineswar. Rākhāl lived with the Master, though
now and then he stayed at Adhar\'s house. Narendra, Bhavanath, Adhar,
M., Ram, Manomohan, and other devotees visited the Master almost every
week.

Hriday, Sri Ramakrishna\'s nephew, was ill in his home in the country.
The Master was worried about him.

One of the devotees had sent him a little money, but the Master did not
know it.

When Sri Ramakrishna came out of the mosquito net and sat on the small
couch, the devotees saluted him.

MASTER (to M.): \"I was meditating inside the net. It occurred to me
that meditation, after all, was nothing but the imagining of a form, and
so I did not enjoy it. One gets satisfaction if God reveals Himself in a
flash. Again, I said to myself, \'Who is it that meditates, and on whom
does he meditate?\' \"

23. \"Yes, sir. You said that God Himself has become everything-the
    universe and all living beings. Even he who meditates is God.\"

MASTER: \"What is more, one cannot meditate unless God wills it. One can
meditate when God makes it possible for one to do so. What do you say?\"

M: \"True, sir. You feel like that because there is no \'I\' in you.
When there is no ego, one feels like that.\"

MASTER: \"But it is good .to have a trace of ego, which makes it
possible for a man to feel that he is the servant of God. As long as a
man thinks that it is he who is doing his duties, it is very good for
him to feel that God is the Master and he God\'s servant. When one is
conscious of doing work, one should establish with God the relationship
of servant and Master.\"

M. was always reflecting on the nature of the Supreme Brahman.

**Nature of Brahman**

MASTER (to M.): \"Like the Ākāśa, Brahman is without any modification.
It has become manifold because of Śakti. Again, Brahman is like fire,
which itself has no colour. The fire appears white if you throw a white
substance into it, red if you throw a red, black if you throw a black.
The three gunas-sattva, rajas, and tamas-belong to Śakti alone. Brahman
Itself is beyond the three gunas. What Brahman is cannot be described.
It is beyond words. That which remains after everything is eliminated by
the Vedantic process of \'Not this, not this\', and which is of the
nature of Bliss, is Brahman.

\"Suppose the husband of a young girl has come to his father-in-law\'s
house and is seated in the drawing-room with other young men of his age.
The girl and her friends are looking at them through the window. Her
friends do not know her husband and ask her, pointing to one young man,
\'Is that your husband?\' \'No\', she answers, smiling. They point to
another young man and ask if he is her husband. Again she answers no.
They repeat the question, referring to a third, and she gives the same
answer. At last they point to her husband and ask, \'Is he the one?\'
She says neither yes nor no, but only smiles and keeps quiet. Her
friends realize that he is her husband.

\"One becomes silent on realizing the true nature of Brahman.

(To M.) \"Well, why do I talk so much?\"

23. \"You talk in order to awaken the spiritual consciousness of the
    devotees. You once said that when an uncooked luchi is dropped into
    boiling ghee it makes a sizzling noise.\"

The Master began to talk to M. about Hazra.

MASTER: \"Do you know the nature of a good man? He never troubles
others. He doesn\'t harass people. The nature of some people is such
that when they go to a feast they want special seats. A man who has true
devotion to God never makes a false step, never gives others trouble for
nothing.

\"It is not good to live in the company of bad people. A man should stay
away from them and thus protect himself. (To M.) Isn\'t that so?\"

23. \"Yes, sir. The mind sinks far down in the company of the wicked.
    But it is quite different with a hero, as you say.\"

MASTER: \"How is that?\"

23. \"When a fire is feeble it goes out when even a small stick is
    thrown into it; but a blazing fire is not affected even if a
    plantain-tree is thrown into it. The tree itself is burnt to
    ashes.\"

The Master asked M. about his friend Hari Babu.

23. \"He has come here to pay you his respects. He lost his wife long
    ago.\" MASTER (to Hari): \"What kind of work do you do?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
23. \"Nothing in particular. But at home he takes good care of his
    parents and his brothers and sisters.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"How is that? You are like \'Elder, the
pumpkin-cutter\'. You are neither a man of the world nor a devotee of
God. That is not good. You must have seen the sort of elderly man who
lives in a family and is always ready, day or night, to entertain the
children. He sits in the parlour and smokes the hubble-bubble. With
nothing in particular to do, he leads a lazy life. Now and again he goes
to the inner court and cuts a pumpkin; for, since women do not cut
pumpkins, they send the children to ask him to come and do it. That is
the extent of his usefulness-hence his nickname, \'Elder, the
pumpkin-cutter\'.

\"You must do \'this\' as well as \'that\'. Do your duties in the world,
and also fix your mind on the Lotus Feet of the Lord. Read books of
devotion like the Bhagavata or the life of Chaitanya when you are alone
and have nothing else to do.\"

It was about ten o\'clock. Sri Ramakrishna finished a light supper of
farina pudding and one or two luchis.

After saluting him, M. and his friend took their leave.

**Friday, September 7, 1883**

Sri Ramakrishna and M. were talking in the Master\'s room at half past
seven in the evening. No one else was present.

MASTER: \"The other day I went to Calcutta. As I drove along the streets
in the carriage, I observed that everyone\'s attention was fixed on low
things. Everyone was brooding over his stomach and running after nothing
but food. Everyone\'s mind was turned to \'woman and gold\'. I saw only
one or two with their attention fixed on higher things, with their minds
turned to God.\"

23. \"The present age has aggravated this stomach-worry. Trying to
    imitate the English, people have turned their attention to more
    luxuries; therefore their wants have also increased.\"

MASTER: \"What do the English think about God?\"

5888. \"They believe in a formless God.\" MASTER: \"That is also one of
      our beliefs.\"

**Master\'s deep spiritual experiences**

For a time Master and disciple remained silent. Then Sri Ramakrishna
began to describe his experiences of Brahman.

MASTER: \"One day I had the vision of Consciousness, non-dual and
indivisible. At first it had been revealed to me that there were
innumerable men, animals, and other creatures. Among them there were
aristocrats, the English, the Mussalmans, myself, scavengers, dogs, and
also a bearded Mussalman with an earthenware tray of rice in his hand.
He put a few grains of rice into everybody\'s mouth. I too tasted a
little.

\"Another day I saw rice, vegetables, and other food-stuff, and filth
and dirt as well, lying around. Suddenly the soul came out of my body
and, like a flame, touched everything. It was like a protruding tongue
of fire and tasted everything once, even the excreta. It was revealed to
me that all these are one Substance, the non-dual and indivisible
Consciousness.

\"Another day it was revealed to me that I had devotees-my intimate
companions, my very own. Thereafter I would climb to the roof of the
kuthi as soon as the bells and the conch-shells of the evening service
sounded in the temples, and cry out with a longing heart: \'Oh, where
are you all? Come here! I am dying to see you!\'

(ToM.) \"Well, what do you think of these visions?\"

1.  \"God sports through you. This I have realized, that you are the
    instrument and God is the Master. God has created other beings as if
    with a machine, but yourself with His own hands.\"

MASTER: \"Well, Hazra says that after the vision of God one acquires the
six divine powers.\"

M: \"Those who seek pure love don\'t want powers.\"

MASTER: \"Perhaps Hazra was a poor man in his previous life, and that is
why he wants so much to see the manifestation of power. He wants to know
what I talk about with the cook. He says to me: \'You don\'t have to
talk to the cook. I shall talk to the manager of the temple myself and
see that you get everything you want.\' (M. laughs aloud.) He talks to
me that way and I say nothing.\"

1.  \"Many a time you have said that a devotee, who loves God for the
    sake of love does not care to see God\'s powers. A true devotee
    wants to see God as Gopala. In the beginning God becomes the magnet,
    and the devotee the needle. But in the end the devotee himself
    becomes the magnet, and God the needle; that is to say, God becomes
    small to His devotee.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, it is just like the sun at dawn. You can easily look at
that sun. It doesn\'t dazzle the eyes; rather it satisfies them. God
becomes tender for the sake of His devotees. He appears before them,
setting aside His powers.\"

Both remained silent for some time.

1.  \"Why should your visions not be real? If they are unreal, then the
    world is still more unreal; for there is only one mind that is the
    instrument of perception. Your pure mind sees those visions, and our
    ordinary minds see worldly objects.\"

MASTER: \"I see that you have grasped the idea of unreality. Well, tell
me what you think of Hazra.\"

M: \"Oh, I don\'t know.\" (The Master laughs.)

MASTER: \"Well, do you find me to be like anybody else?\"

M: \"No, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Like any other paramahamsa?\"

M: \"No, sir. You can\'t be compared to anybody else.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Have you heard of a tree called the \'achina\'?\"

M: \"No, sir.\"

MASTER: \"There is a tree called by that name. But nobody knows what it
is.\"

1.  \"Likewise, it is not possible to recognize you. The more a man
    understands you, the more uplifted he will be.\"

M. was silent. He said to himself: \"The Master referred to \'the sun at
dawn\' and \'the tree unrecognizable by man\'. Did he mean an
Incarnation of God? Is this the play of God through man? Is the Master
himself an Incarnation? Was this why he cried to the devotees from the
roof of the kuthi: \'Where are you? Come to me!\'? \"

Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the steps of the southeast verandah of
the Kāli temple. Rākhāl , M., and Hazra were with him. He talked
light-heartedly about his boyhood days.

When it was dusk he returned to his room and sat down on the small
couch. Soon he went into samādhi and in that state began to talk to the
Divine Mother. He said: \"Mother, what is all this row about? Shall I go
there? I shall go if You take me.\" The Master was to go to a devotee\'s
house. Was it for this that he was asking the Divine Mother\'s
permission?

Again he spoke to Her, perhaps praying about an intimate disciple:

\"Mother, please make him stainless. Well, Mother, why have You given
him only a particle?\" Remaining silent a moment, he said: \"Oh, I see.
That will be enough for Your work.\"

**Nature of the Divine Incarnation**

In the same state he said, addressing the devotees: \"That which is
Brahman is verily Śakti. I address That, again, as the Mother. I call It
Brahman when It is inactive, and Śakti when It creates, preserves, and
destroys. It is like water, sometimes still and sometimes covered with
waves. The Incarnation of God is a part of the lila of Śakti. The
purpose of the Divine Incarnation is to teach man ecstatic love for God.
The Incarnation is like the udder of the cow, the only place milk is to
be got. God incarnates Himself as man. There is a great accumulation of
divinity in an Incarnation, like the accumulation of fish in a deep
hollow in a lake.\"

Some of the devotees wondered, \"Is Sri Ramakrishna an Incarnation of
God, like Krishna, Chaitanya, and Christ?\"

**Sunday, September 9, 1883**

Sri Ramakrishna had finished his midday meal and was sitting on the
small couch. Rākhāl , M., and Ratan were sitting on the floor. Ratan was
the steward of Jadu Mallick\'s garden house and was devoted to the
Master. Now and then Ram Chatterji and Hazra passed in or out of the
room. It was about two o\'clock.

Ratan told the Master that a yatra performance by Nilkantha had been
arranged in Jadu Mallick\'s house in Calcutta.

RATAN (to the Master): \"You must go. The date has been set.\"

MASTER: \"That\'s good, I want to go. Nilkantha sings with great
devotion.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"That is true, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Tears flow from his eyes as he sings. (To Ratan) I am thinking
of spending the night in Calcutta when I go to see the yatra.\"

RATAN: \"That will be fine.\"

Ram Chatterji and the other devotees asked Ratan about a theft in Jadu
Mallick\'s house.

RATAN: \"Yes, the golden sandals of the Deity were stolen from the
shrine room in Jadu Babu\'s house. It has created an uproar. They are
going to try to discover the thief by means of a \'charmed plate\'.
Everybody will sit in one room, and the plate will move in the direction
of the man who stole the sandals.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"How does the plate move? By itself?\"

RATAN: \"No. A man presses it to the ground.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"It is a kind of sleight of hand. It is a clever trick.\"

MASTER: \"The real cleverness is the cleverness by which one realizes
God. That trick is the best of all tricks.\"

As the conversation went on, several Bengali gentlemen entered the room
and, after saluting the Master, sat down. One of them was already known
to Sri Ramakrishna. These gentlemen followed the cult of Tantra. The
Master knew that one of them indulged in immoral acts in the name of
religion. The Tantra rituals, under certain conditions, allow the mixing
of men and women devotees. But Sri Ramakrishna regarded all women, even
prostitutes, as manifestations of the Divine Mother. He addressed them
all as \"Mother\".

MASTER (with a smile): \"Where is Achalananda? My ideal is different
from that of Achalananda and his disciples. As for myself, I look on all
women as my mother.\"

The visiting gentlemen sat silent.

**Master\'s attitude toward women**

MASTER: \"Every woman is a mother to me. Achalananda used to stay here
now and then. He would drink a great deal of consecrated wine. Hearing
about my attitude toward women, he stubbornly justified his own views.
He insisted again and again: \'Why should you not recognize the attitude
of a \"hero\" toward women? Won\'t you admit the injunctions of Śiva?
Śiva Himself is the author of the Tantra, which prescribes various
disciplines, including the \"heroic\".\' I said to him: \'But, my dear
sir, I don\'t know. I don\'t like these ideas. To me every woman is a
mother.\'

\"Achalananda did not support his own children. He said to me, \'God
will support them.\' I said nothing. But this is the way I felt about
it: \'Who will support your children? I hope your renunciation of wife
and children is not a way of earning money. People will think you are a
holy man because you have renounced everything: so they will give you
money. In that way you will earn plenty of money.\'

\"Spiritual practice with a view to winning a lawsuit and earning money,
or to helping others win in court and acquire property, shows a very
mean understanding.

**Good use of money**

\"Money enables a man to get food and drink, build a house, worship the
Deity, serve devotees and holy men, and help the poor when he happens to
meet them. These are the good uses of money. Money is not meant for
luxuries or creature comforts or for buying a position in society.

\"People practise various Tantrik disciplines to acquire supernatural
powers. How mean such people are! Krishna said to Arjuna, \'Friend, by
acquiring one of the eight siddhis you may add a little to your power,
but you will not be able to realize Me.\' One cannot get rid of maya as
long as one exercises supernatural powers. And maya begets egotism.

\"Body and wealth are impermanent. Why go to so much trouble for their
sakes? Just think of the plight of the hathayogis. Their attention is
fixed on one ideal only-longevity. They do not aim at the realization of
God at all. They practise such exercises as washing out the intestines,
drinking milk through a tube, and the like, with that one aim in view.

\"There was once a goldsmith whose tongue suddenly turned up and stuck
to his palate. He looked like a man in samādhi. He became completely
inert and remained so a long time. People came to worship him. After
several years, his tongue suddenly returned to its natural position, and
he became conscious of things as before. So he went back to his work as
a goldsmith.(All laugh.)

\"These are physical things and have nothing to do with God. There was a
man who knew eighty-two postures and talked big about yoga-samādhi. But
inwardly he was drawn to \'woman and gold\'. Once he found a bank-note
worth several thousand rupees. He could not resist the temptation, and
swallowed it, thinking he would get it out somehow later on. The note
was got out of him all right, but he was sent to jail for three years.
In my guilelessness I used to think that the man had made great
spiritual progress. Really, I say it upon my word!

**Master\'s renunciation of money**

\"Mahendra Pal of Sinthi once gave Ramlal five rupees. Ramlal told me
about it after he had gone. I asked him what the gift was for, and
Ramlal said that it was meant for me. I thought it might enable me to
payoff some of my debt for milk. That night I went to bed and, if you
will believe me, I suddenly woke up with a pain. I felt as if a cat were
scratching inside my chest. I at once went to Ramlal and asked him:
\'For whom did Mahendra give this money? Was it for your aunt?\'7
\'No,\' said Ramlal, \'it is meant for you.\' I said to him, \'Go and
return the money at once, or I shall have no peace of mind.\' Ramlal
returned the money early in the morning and I felt relieved.

\"Once a rich man came here and said to me: \'Sir, you must do something
so that I may win my lawsuit. I have heard of your reputation and so I
have come here.\' \'My dear sir,\' I said to him, \'you have made a
mistake. I am not the person you are looking for; Achalananda is your
man.\'

\"A true devotee of God does not care for such things as wealth or
health. He thinks: \'Why should I practise spiritual austerities for
creature comforts, money, or name and fame? These are all impermanent.
They last only a day or two.\' \"

The visiting gentlemen took leave of the Master after saluting him. When
they had departed, Sri Ramakrishna smiled and said to M., \"You can
never make a thief listen to religion. (All laugh.)

\"Well, what do you think of Narendra?\"

M: \"He is splendid.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. His intelligence is as great as his learning. Besides, he
is gifted in music, both as a singer and player. Then too, he has
control over his passions. He says he will never marry.\"

1.  \"You once said that one who constantly talks of his sin really
    becomes a sinner; he cannot extricate himself from sin. But if a man
    has firm faith that he is the son of God, then he makes rapid
    strides in spiritual life.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, faith. What tremendous faith Krishnakishore had! He used
to say: \'I have spoken the name of God once. That is enough. How can I
remain a sinner? I have become pure and stainless.\' One day Haladhāri
said: \'Even Ajamila had to perform austerities to gratify God. Can one
receive the grace of God without austerities? What will one gain by
speaking the name of Narayana only once?\' At these remarks
Krishnakishore\'s anger knew no bounds. The next time he came to this
garden to pick flowers he wouldn\'t even look at Haladhāri.

\"Haladhāri\'s father was a great devotee. At bathing-time he would
stand waist-deep in the water and meditate on God, uttering the sacred
mantra; then the tears would flow from his eyes.

**Krishnakishore\'s faith in God**

\"One day a holy man came to the bathing-place on the Ganges at
Ariadaha. We talked about seeing him. Haladhāri said, \'What shall we
gain by seeing the body of a man, a mere cage made of the five
elements?\' Krishnakishore heard about it and said: \'What? Did
Haladhāri ask what would be gained by visiting a holy man? By repeating
the name of Krishna or Rāma a man transforms his physical body into a
spiritual body. To such a man everything is the embodiment of Spirit. To
him Krishna is the embodiment of Spirit, and His sacred Abode is the
embodiment of Spirit.\' He also said, \'A man who utters the name of
Krishna or Rāma even once reaps the result of a hundred sandhyas.\'

\"One of his sons chanted the name of Rāma on his death-bed.
Krishnakishore said, \'He has nothing to worry about; he has chanted the
name of Rāma.\' But now and then he wept. After all, it was the death of
his own son.

Nothing whatsoever is achieved by the performance of worship, japa, and
devotions, without faith. Isn\'t that so?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. That is true.\"

MASTER: \"I see people coming to the Ganges to bathe. They talk their
heads off about everything under the

sun. The widowed aunt says: \'Without me they cannot perform the Durga
Puja. I have to look after even the smallest detail. Again, I have to
supervise everything when there is a marriage festiva1 in the family,
even the bed of the bride and groom.\'\"

M: \"Why should we blame them? How else will they pass the time?\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Some people have their shrine rooms in their
attics. The women arrange the offerings and flowers and make the
sandal-paste. But, while doing so, they never say a word about God. The
burden of the conversation is: \'What shall we cook today? I couldn\'t
get good vegetables in the market. That curry was delicious yesterday.
That boy is my cousin. Hello there! Have you that job still? Don\'t ask
me how I am. My Hari is no more.\' Just fancy! They talk of such things
in the shrine room at the time of worship!\"

1.  \"Yes, sir, it is so in the majority of cases. As you say, can one
    who has passionate yearning for God continue formal worship and
    devotions for long?\"

Sri Ramakrishna and M. were now conversing alone.

M: \"Sir, if it is God Himself who has become everything, then why do
people have so many different feelings?\"

MASTER: \"Undoubtedly God exists in all beings as the All-pervading
Spirit, but the manifestations of His Power are different in different
beings. In some places there is a manifestation of the power of
Knowledge; in others, of the power of ignorance. In some places there is
a greater manifestation of power than in others. Don\'t you see that
among human beings there are cheats and gamblers, to say nothing of men
who are like tigers. I think of them as the \'cheat God\', the \'tiger
God\'.\"

M. (with a smile): \"We should salute them from a distance. If we go
near the \'tiger God\' and embrace him, he may devour us.\"

MASTER: \"He and His Power, Brahman and Its Power-nothing else exists
but this. In a hymn to Rāma, Nārada

said: \'O Rāma, You are Śiva, and Sita is Bhagavati; You are Brahma, and
Sita is Brahmani; You are Indra, and Sita is Indrani; You are Narayana,
and Sita is Lakshmi. O Rāma, You are the symbol of all that is
masculine, and Sita of all that is feminine.\' \"

> M: \"Sir, what is the Spirit-form of God like?\"
>
> Sri Ramakrishna reflected a moment and said softly: \"Shall I tell you
> what it is like? It is like water. . . .
>
> One understands all this through spiritual discipline.
>
> \"Believe in the form of God. It is only after attaining Brahmajnana
> that one sees non-duality, the oneness of Brahman and Its Śakti.
> Brahman and Śakti are identical, like fire and its power to burn. When
> a man thinks of fire, he must also think of its power to burn. Again,
> when he thinks of the power to burn, he must also think of fire.
> Further, Brahman and Śakti are like milk and its whiteness, water and
> its wetness.
>
> **Vijnāna or Transcendental Knowledge**
>
> \"But there is a stage beyond even Brahmajnana. After jnāna comes
> vijnāna. He who is aware of knowledge is also aware of ignorance. The
> sage Vasishtha was stricken with grief at the death of his hundred
> sons. Asked by Lakshmana why a man of knowledge should grieve for such
> a reason, Rāma said, \'Brother, go beyond both knowledge and
> ignorance.\' He who has knowledge has ignorance also. If a thorn has
> entered your foot, get another thorn and with its help take out the
> first; then throwaway the second also.\"
>
> M: \"Should one throwaway both knowledge and ignorance?\"
>
> MASTER: \"Yes. That is why one should acquire vijnāna. You see, he who
> is aware of light is also aware of darkness. He who is aware of
> happiness is also aware of suffering. He who is aware of virtue is
> also aware of vice. He who is aware of good is also aware of evil. He
> who is aware of holiness is also aware of unholiness. He who is aware
> of \'I\' is also aware of \'you\'.
>
> \"What is vijnāna? It is knowing God in a special way. The awareness
> and conviction that fire exists in wood is jnāna, knowledge. But to
> cook rice on that fire, eat the rice, and get nourishment from it is
> vijnāna. To know by one\'s inner experience that God exists is jnāna.
> But to talk to Him, to enjoy Him as Child, as Friend, as Master, as
> Beloved, is vijnāna. The realization that God alone has become the
> universe and all living beings is vijnāna.
>
> \"According to one school of thought, God cannot be seen. Who sees
> whom? Is God outside you, that you can see Him? One sees only oneself.
> Having once entered the \'black waters\' of the ocean, the ship does
> not come back and so cannot describe what it experiences.\"

1.  \"It is true, sir. As you say, having climbed to the top of the
    monument, one becomes unaware of what is below: horses and
    carriages, men and women, houses, shops and offices, and so on.\"

> MASTER: \"I don\'t go to the Kāli temple nowadays. Is that an offence?
> At one time Narendra used to say, \'What? He still goes to the Kāli
> temple!\' \"
>
> M: \"Every day you are in a new state of mind. How can you ever offend
> God?\"
>
> MASTER: \"Someone said to Sen, about Hriday: \'He is very ill. Please
> bring two pieces of cloth and a couple of shirts for him. We will send
> them to his village.\' Sen offered only two rupees. How do you explain
> that? He has so much money, and yet he is so miserly! What do you say
> to that?\"

1.  \"Those who seek God cannot behave that way-I mean those whose goal
    is the attainment of Knowledge.\" MASTER: \"God alone is the Reality
    and all else is unreal.\"

> **Saturday, September 22, 1883**
>
> Sri Ramakrishna was seated in the drawing-room of Adhar\'s house in
> Calcutta, with Rākhāl , Adhar, M., Ishan, and other devotees. Many
> gentlemen of the neighbourhood were also present. It was afternoon.

The Master was very fond of Ishan. He had been a superintendent in the
Accountant General\'s office, and later on his children also occupied
high government positions. One of them was a class-mate of Narendra.
Ishan\'s purse was always open for the poor and needy. When he retired
from service, he devoted his time to spiritual practices and charity. He
often visited Sri Ramakrishna at Dakshineswar.

MASTER (to Ishan): \"Please tell us the story of the boy who posted the
letter.\"

ISHAN (with a smile): \"A boy once heard that God is our Creator. So he
wrote a letter to God, setting forth his prayers, and posted it. The
address he put on the envelope was \'Heaven\'.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"Did you hear that story? One succeeds in
spiritual life when one develops a faith like that boy\'s. (To Ishan)
Tell us about the renunciation of activities.\"

ISHAN: \"After the attainment of God, religious duties such as the
sandyha drop away. One day some people were sitting on the bank of the
Ganges performing the sandyha. But one of them abstained from it. On
being asked the reason, he said: \'I am observing asoucha. I cannot
perform the sandyha ceremony.8 In my case the defilement is due to both
a birth and a death. My mother, Ignorance, is dead, and my son,
Self-Knowledge, has been born.\'\"

MASTER: \"Tell us, also, how caste distinctions drop away when one
attains Self-Knowledge.\"

ISHAN: \"Sankaracharya was once climbing the steps after finishing his
bath in the Ganges, when he saw just in front of him an untouchable who
had a pack of dogs with him. \'You have touched me!\' said Sankara.
\'Revered sir,\' said the pariah, \'I have not touched you, nor have you
touched me. The Self is the Inner Ruler of all beings and cannot be
contaminated. Is there any difference between the sun\'s reflection in
wine and its reflection in the Ganges?\' \"

MASTER (with a smile): \"And about harmony: how one can realize God
through all paths.\"

Ishan (smiling): \"Both Hari and Hara are derived from the same root.
The difference is only in the pratyaya. In reality, He who is Hari is
also Hara. If a man has faith in God, then it doesn\'t matter whom he
worships.\"

MASTER: \"And please tell us also how the heart of the sādhu is the
greatest of all.\"

ISHAN: \"This earth is the largest thing we see anywhere around us. But
larger than the earth is the ocean, and larger than the ocean is the
sky. But Vishnu, the Godhead, has covered earth, sky, and the nether
world with one of His feet. And that foot of Vishnu is enshrined in the
sādhu\'s heart. Therefore the heart of a holy man is the greatest of
all.\"

The devotees were delighted with Ishan\'s words.

Ishan intended to retire to a solitary place and practise a special
discipline of the Gayatri, through which Brahman is invoked. But the
Master said that the Knowledge of Brahman was not possible without the
complete destruction of worldliness. Further, he said that it was
impossible for a man totally to withdraw his mind from the objects of
the senses in the Kaliyuga, when his life was dependent on food. That is
why the Master discouraged people from attempting the Vedic worship of
Brahman and asked them to worship Śakti, the Divine Mother, who is
identical with Brahman.

MASTER (to Ishan): \"Why do you waste your time simply repeating \'Neti,
neti\'? Nothing whatsoever can be specified about Brahman, except that
It exists.

\"Whatever we see or think about is the manifestation of the glory of
the Primordial Energy, the Primal Consciousness. Creation, preservation,
and destruction, living beings and the universe, and further, meditation
and the meditator, bhakti and prema-all these are manifestations of the
glory of that Power.

\"But Brahman is identical with Its Power. On returning from Ceylon,
Hanuman praised Rāma, saying: \'O Rāma, You are the Supreme Brahman, and
Sita is Your Śakti. You and She are identical\' Brahman and Śakti are
like the snake and. its wriggling motion. Thinking of the snake, one
must think of its wriggling motion, and thinking of its wriggling
motion, one must think of the snake. Or they are like milk and its
whiteness. Thinking of milk, one has to think of its colour, that is,
whiteness, and thinking of the whiteness of milk, one has to think of
milk itself. Or they are like water and its wetness. Thinking of water,
one has to think of its wetness, and thinking of the wetness of water,
one has to think of water.

\"This Primal Power, Mahamaya, has covered Brahman. As soon as the
covering is withdrawn, one realizes: \'I am what I was before\', \'I am
Thou; Thou art I\'.

\"As long as that covering remains, the Vedantic formula \'I am He\',
that is, man is the Supreme Brahman, does not rightly apply. The wave is
part of the water, but the water is not part of the wave. As long as
that covering remains, one should call on God as Mother. Addressing God,
the devotee should say, \'Thou art the Mother and I am Thy child; Thou
art the Master and I am Thy servant.\' It is good to have the attitude
of the servant toward the master. From this relationship of master and
servant spring up other attitudes: the attitude of serene love for God,
the attitude of friend toward friend, and so forth. When the master
loves his servant, he may say to him, \'Come, sit by my side; there is
no difference between you and me.\' But if the servant comes forward of
his own will to sit by the master, will not the master be angry?

\"God\'s play on earth as an Incarnation is the manifestation of the
glory of the ChitŚakti, the Divine Power. That which is Brahman is also
Rāma, Krishna, and Śiva.\"

ISHAN: \"Yes, sir. Both Hari and Hara are derived from the same root.
The difference lies only in the pratyaya.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, there is only One without a second. The Vedas speak of It
as \'Om Satchidananda Brahma\', the Puranas as \'Om Satchidananda
Krishna,\' and the Tantra as \'Om Satchidananda Śiva\'.

\"The ChitŚakti, as Mahamaya, has deluded all with ignorance. It is said
in the Adhyātma Rāmāyana that when the rishis saw Rāma, they prayed to
Him in these words only: \'O Rāma, please do not delude us with Your
world-bewitching maya.\' \"

ISHAN: \"What is this maya?\"

MASTER: \"Whatever you see, think, or hear is maya. In a word, \'woman
and gold\' is the covering of maya.

\"There is no harm in chewing betel-leaf, eating fish, smoking, or
rubbing the body with oil. What will one achieve by renouncing only
these things? The one thing needful is the renunciation of \'woman and
gold\'. That renunciation is the real and supreme renunciation.
Householders should go into solitude now and then, to practise spiritual
discipline in order to cultivate devotion to God; they should renounce
mentally. But the sannyasi should renounce both mentally and physically.

\"I once said to Keshab, \'How can a typhoid patient be cured if he
remains in a room where a pitcher of water and a jar of pickles are
kept?\' Now and then one should live in solitude \".

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, what do you think of the Navavidhan? It seems to me
like a hotchpotch of everything.\"

MASTER: \"Some say it is a modern thing. That sets me wondering: \'Then
is the God of the Brahmo Samaj a new God?\' The Brahmos speak of their
cult as the Navavidhan, as a New Dispensation. Well, it may be so. Who
knows? There are six systems of philosophy; so perhaps it is like one of
these.

\"But do you know where those who speak of the formless God make their
mistake? It is where they say that God is formless only, and that those
who differ with them are wrong.

\"But I know that God is both with and without form. And He may have
many more aspects. It is possible for Him to be everything.

(To Ishan) \"The ChitŚakti, Mahamaya, has become the twenty-four cosmic
principles. One day as I was meditating, my mind wandered away to
Rashke\'s house. He is a scavenger. I said to my mind, \'Stay there, you
rogue!\' The Divine Mother revealed to me that the men and women in this
house were mere masks; inside them was the same Divine Power, Kundalini,
that rises up through the six spiritual centres of the body.

\"Is the Primal Energy man or woman? Once at Kamarpukur I saw the
worship of Kāli in the house of the Lahas. They put a sacred thread.11
on the image of the Divine Mother. One man asked, \'Why have they put
the sacred thread on the Mother\'s person?\' The master of the house
said: \'Brother, I see that you have rightly understood the Mother. But
I do not yet know whether the Divine Mother is male or female.\'

\"It is said that Mahamaya swallowed Śiva. When the six centres in Her
were awakened, Śiva came out through Her thigh. Then Śiva created the
Tantra philosophy.

\"Take refuge in the ChitŚakti, the Mahamaya.\"

ISHAN: \"Please bestow your grace on me.\"

MASTER: \"Say to God with a guileless heart, \'O God, reveal Thyself to

me.\' And weep. Pray to God, \'O God, keep my mind away from \"woman,
and gold\".\' And dive deep. Can a man get pearls by floating or
swimming on the surface? He must dive deep.

**Faith in the guru**

\"One must get instruction from a guru. Once a man was looking for a
stone image of Śiva. Someone said to him: \'Go to a certain river. There
you will find a tree. Near it is a whirlpool. Dive into the water there,
and you will find the image of Śiva.\' So I say that one must get
instruction from a teacher.\"

ISHAN: \"That is true, sir.\"

MASTER: \"It is Satchidananda that comes to us in the form of the guru.
If a man is initiated by a human guru, he will not achieve anything if
he regards his guru as a mere man. The guru should be regarded as the
direct manifestation of God. Only then can the disciple have faith in
the mantra given by the guru. Once a man has faith he, achieves all. The
sudra Ekalavya learnt archery in the forest before a clay image of
Drona; He worshipped the image as the living Drona; that by itself
enabled him to attain mastery in archery.

\"Don\'t mix intimately with brahmin pundits. Their only concern is to
earn money. I have seen brahmin priests reciting the Chandi while
performing the swastyayana. It is hard to tell whether they are reading
the sacred book or something else. They turn half the pages without
reading them. (All laugh.)

\"A nail-knife suffices to kill oneself. One needs sword and shield to
kill others. That is the purpose of the sastras.

\"One doesn\'t really need to study the different scriptures. If one has
no discrimination, one doesn\'t achieve anything through mere
scholarship, even though one studies all the six systems of philosophy.
Call on God, crying to Him secretly in solitude. He will give all that
you need.\"

Sri Ramakrishna had heard that Ishan was building a house on the bank of
the Ganges for the practice of spiritual discipline. He asked Ishan
eagerly: \"Has the house been built? Let me tell you that the less
people know of your spiritual life, the better it will be for you.
Devotees endowed with sattva meditate in a secluded corner or in a
forest, or withdraw into the mind. Sometimes they meditate inside the
mosquito net.\"

Now and then Ishan invited Hazra to his house. Hazra had a craze for
outward purity. Sri Ramakrishna often

discouraged him in this.

MASTER (to Ishan): \"Let me tell you another thing. Don\'t be
over-fastidious about outward purity. Once a sādhu felt very thirsty. A
water-carrier was carrying water in his skin water-bag, and offered the
water to the holy man. The sādhu asked if the skin was clean. The
carrier said: \'Revered sir; my skin bag is perfectly clean. But inside
your skin are all sorts of filthy things. That is why I can ask you to
drink water from my skin. It won\'t injure you.\' By \'your skin\', the
carrier meant the body, the belly, and so forth.

\"Have faith in the name of God. Then you won\'t need even to go to holy
places.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sang, intoxicated with divine fervour:

Why should I go to Ganga or Gaya, to Kasi, Kanchi, or Prabhas,

So long as I can breathe my last with Kāli\'s name upon my lips?

Ishan remained silent.

MASTER (to Ishan): \"Tell me if you have any more doubts.\"

ISHAN: \"You said everything when you spoke of faith.\"

MASTER: \"God can be realized by true faith alone. And the realization
is hastened if you believe everything about God. The cow that picks and
chooses its food gives milk only in dribblets, but if she eats all kinds
of plants, then her milk flows in torrents.

\"Once I heard a story. A man heard the command of God that he should
see his Ideal Deity in a ram. He at once believed it. It is God who
exists in all beings.

\"A guru said to his disciple, \'It is Rāma alone who resides in all
bodies.\' The disciple was a man of great faith. One day a dog snatched
a piece of bread from him and started to run away. He ran after the dog,
with a jar of butter in his hand, and cried again and again: \'O Rāma,
stand still a minute. That bread hasn\'t been buttered.\'

\"What tremendous faith Krishnakishore had! He used to say, \'By
chanting \"Om Krishna, Om Rāma\", one gets the result of a million
sandhyas.\' Once he said to me secretly, \'I don\'t like the sandhya and
other devotions any more; but don\'t tell anyone.\'

\"Sometimes I too feel that way. The Mother reveals to me that She
Herself has become everything. One day I was coming from the pine-grove
toward the Panchavati. A dog followed me. I stood still for a while near
the Panchavati. The thought came to my mind that the Mother might say
something to me through that dog.

\"You were absolutely right when you said that through faith alone one
achieves all.\"

ISHAN: \"But we are householders.\"

MASTER: \"What if you are? Through His grace even the impossible becomes
possible. Ramprasad sang, \'This world is a mere framework of
illusion.\' Another man composed a song by way of reply:

> *This very world is a mansion of mirth;*
>
> *Here I can eat, here drink and make merry.*
>
> *Janaka\'s might was unsurpassed;*
>
> *What did he lack of the world or the Spirit?*
>
> *Holding to one as well as the other,*
>
> *He drank his milk from a brimming cup!*

\"One should first realize God through spiritual discipline in solitude,
and then live in the world. Only then can one be a King Janaka. What can
you achieve otherwise?

\"Further, take the case of He dances in a state of samādhi.\"

Śiva. He has everything-Kartika, Ganesa, Lakshmi, and Sarasvati. Still,
sometimes divine fervour, chanting the name of Rāma, and sometimes He is
absorbed in

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 14**

INSTRUCTION TO VAISHNAVĀS AND BRĀHMOS

> Sunday, September 23, 1883

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was sitting in his room at Dakshineswar with Rākhāl ,
M., and other devotees. Hazra sat on the porch outside. The Master was
conversing with the devotees.

MASTER (to a devotee): \"Narendra doesn\'t like even you, nowadays. (To
M.) Why didn\'t he come to see me at Adhar\'s house?

**Eulogy of Narendra**

\"How versatile Narendra is! He is gifted in singing, in playing on
instruments, and in studies. He is independent and doesn\'t care about
anybody. The other day he was returning to Calcutta with Captain in his
carriage. Captain begged Narendra to sit beside him, but he took a seat
opposite. He didn\'t even look at Captain.

\"What can a man achieve through mere scholarship? What is needed is
prayer and spiritual discipline. Gauri of Indesh was both a scholar and
a devotee. He was a worshipper of the Divine Mother. Now and then he
would be overpowered with spiritual fervour. When he chanted a hymn to
the Mother, the pundits would seem like earth-worms beside him. I too
would be overcome with ecstasy.

\"At first he was a bigoted worshipper of Śakti. He used to pick up
tulsi leaves with a couple of sticks, so as not to touch them with his
fingers. (All laugh.) Then he went home. When he came back he didn\'t
behave that way any more. He gave remarkable interpretations of Hindu
mythology. He would say that the ten heads of Ravana represented the ten
organs. Kumbhakarna was the symbol, of tamas, Ravana of rajas, and
Bibhishana of sattva. That was why Bibhishana obtained favour with
Rāma.\"

After the Master\'s midday meal, while he was resting, Ram, Tārak, and
some other devotees arrived from Calcutta.

Nityagopal, Tārak, and several others were staying with Ram, a
house-holder disciple of the Master. Nityagopal was always in an exalted
spiritual mood. Tārak\'s mind, too, was always indrawn; he seldom
exchanged words with others. Ram looked after their physical needs.
Rākhāl now and then spent a few days at Adhar\'s house.

RAM (to the Master): \"We have been taking lessons on the drum.\"

MASTER (to Ram): \"Nityagopal too?\"

RAM: \"No, sir. He plays a little.\"

MASTER: \"And Tārak?\"

RAM: \"He knows a good deal.\"

MASTER: \"Then he won\'t keep his eyes on the ground so much. If the
mind is much directed to something else, it doesn\'t dwell deeply on
God.\"

RAM: \"I have been studying the drum only to accompany the kirtan.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"I hear that you too are taking singing lessons. Is
that so?\"

M: \"No, sir. I just open my mouth now and then.\"

MASTER: \"Have you practised that song: \'O Mother, make me mad with Thy
love\'? If you have, please sing it. The song expresses my ideal
perfectly.\"

The conversation turned to Hazra\'s hatred for certain people, which Sri
Ramakrishna did not like.

MASTER (to the devotees): \"I used frequently to visit a certain house
at Kamarpukur. The boys of the family were of my age. The other day they
came here and spent two or three days with me. Their mother, like Hazra,
used to hate people. Then something happened to her foot, and gangrene
set in. On account of the foul smell, no one could enter her room. I
told the incident to Hazra and asked him not to hate anyone.\"

**Master in spiritual mood**

Toward evening, as Sri Ramakrishna was standing in the northwest corner
of the courtyard, he went into samādhi. In those days the Master
remained almost always in an ecstatic state. He would lose consciousness
of the world at the slightest suggestion from outside. But for scant
conversation with visiting devotees, he remained in an indrawn mood and
was unable to perform his daily worship and devotions.

Coming down to the relative world, he began to talk to the Divine
Mother, still standing where he was. \"O Mother,\" he said, \"worship
has left me, and japa also. Please see, Mother, that I do not become an
inert thing. Let my attitude toward God be that of the servant toward
the master. O Mother, let me talk about Thee and chant Thy holy name. I
want to sing Thy glories. Give me a little strength of body that I may
move about, that I may go to places where Thy devotees live, and sing
Thy name.\"

In the morning Sri Ramakrishna had been to the Kāli temple to offer
flowers at the Mother\'s feet.

Continuing, the Master said: \"O Mother, I offered flowers at Thy feet
this morning. I thought: \'That is good. My mind is again going back to
formal worship.\' Then why do I feel like this now? Why art Thou turning
me into a sort of inert thing?\"

The moon had not yet risen. It was a dark night. The Master, still in an
abstracted mood, sat on the small couch in his room and continued his
talk with the Divine Mother. He said: \"Why this special discipline of
the Gayatri? Why this jumping from this roof to that? Who told him to do
it? Perhaps he is doing it of his own accord. . . . Well, he will
practise a little of that discipline.\"

The previous day Sri Ramakrishna had discouraged Ishan about Vedic
worship, saying that it was not suitable for the Kaliyuga. He had asked
Ishan to worship God as the Divine Mother.

The Master said to M., \"Are these all my fancies, or are they real?\"
M. remained silent with wonder at the Master\'s intimate relationship
with the Divine Mother. He thought She must be within us as well as
without. Indeed She must be very near us; or why should the Master speak
to Her in a whisper?

**Wednesday, September 26, 1883**

There were very few devotees with the Master, for most of them came on
Sundays. Rākhāl and Lātu were living with him the greater part of the
time. M. arrived in the afternoon and found the Master seated on the
small couch. The conversation turned to Narendra.

MASTER (to M.): \"Have you seen Narendra lately? (With a smile) He said
of me: \'He still goes to the Kāli temple, But he will not when he truly
understands.\' His people are very much dissatisfied with him because he
comes here now and then. The other day he came here in a hired carriage,
and Surendra paid for it. Narendra\'s aunt almost had a row with
Surendra about it.\"

The Master left the couch and went to the northeast verandah, where
Hazra, Kishori, Rākhāl , and a few other devotees were sitting.

MASTER (to M.): \"How is it that you are here today? Have you no
school?\"

1.  \"Our school closed today at half past one.\" MASTER: \"Why so
    early?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
23. \"Vidyasagar visited the school. He owns the school. So the boys get
    a half holiday whenever he comes.\"

**Efficacy of truthfulness**

MASTER: \"Why doesn\'t Vidyasagar keep his word? \'If one who holds to
truth and looks on woman as his mother does not realize God, then Tulsi
is a liar.\' If a man holds to truth he will certainly realize God. The
other day Vidyasagar said he would come here and visit me. But he
hasn\'t kept his word.

**Difference between scholar and holy man**

\"There is a big difference between a scholar and a holy man. The mind
of a mere scholar is fixed on \'woman and gold\', but the sādhu\'s mind
is on the Lotus Feet of Hari. A scholar says one thing and does another.
But it is quite a different matter with a sādhu. The words and actions
of a man who has given his mind to the Lotus Feet of God are altogether
different. In Benares I saw a young sannyasi who belonged to the sect of
Nanak.. He was the same age as you. He used to refer to me as the
\'loving monk\'. His sect has a monastery in Benares. I was invited
there one day. I found that the mohant was like a housewife. I asked
him, \'What is the way?\' \'For the Kaliyuga\', he said, \'the path of
devotion as enjoined by Nārada.\' He was reading a book. When the
reading was over, he recited: \'Vishnu is in water, Vishnu is on land,
Vishnu is on the mountain top; the whole world is pervaded by Vishnu.\'
At the end he said, \'Peace! Peace! Abiding Peace!\'

**Path of love suited to modern times**

\"One day he was reading the Gitā. He was so strict about his monastic
rules that he would not read a holy book looking at a worldly man. So he
turned his face toward me and his back on Mathur, who was also present.
It was this holy man who told me of Nārada\'s path of devotion as suited
to the people of the Kaliyuga.\"

M: \"Are not sādhus of his class followers of the Vedānta?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, they are. But they also accept the path of devotion. The
fact is that in the Kaliyuga one cannot wholly follow the path laid down
in the Vedas. Once a man said to me that he would perform the
Purascharana of the Gayatri. I said: \'Why don\'t you do that according
to the Tantra? In the Kaliyuga the discipline of Tantra is very
efficacious.\'

\"It is extremely difficult to perform the rites enjoined in the Vedas.
Further, at the present time people lead the life of slaves It is said
that those who serve others for twelve years or so become slaves. They
acquire the traits of those they serve. While serving their masters they
acquire the rajas, the tamas, the spirit of violence, the love of
luxury, and the other traits of their masters. Not only do they serve
their masters, but they also enjoy a pension after their term of service
is over.

**Description of various monks**

\"Once a Vedantic monk came here. He used to dance at the sight of a
cloud. He would go into an ecstasy of joy over a rain-storm. He would
get very angry if, anyone went near him when he meditated. One day I
came to him while he was meditating, and that made him very cross. He
discriminated constantly, \'Brahman alone is real and the world is
illusory.\' Since the appearance of diversity is due to maya, he walked
about with a prism from a chandelier in his hand. One sees different
colours through the prism; in reality there is no such thing as colour.
Likewise, nothing exists, in reality, except Brahman. But there is an
appearance of the manifold because of maya, egoism. He would not look at
an object more than once, lest he should be deluded by maya and
attachment. He would discriminate, while taking his bath, at the sight
of birds flying in the. sky. He knew grammar. He stayed here for three
days. One day he heard the sound of a flute near the embankment

and said that a man who had realized Brahman would go into samādhi at
such a sound.\"

While talking about the monk, the Master showed his devotees the manners
and movements of a paramahamsa: the gait of a child, face beaming with
laughter, eyes swimming in joy, and body completely naked. Then he again
took his seat on the small couch and poured out his soul-enthralling
words.

MASTER (to M.): \"I learnt Vedānta from Nangta: \'Brahman alone is real;
the world is illusory.\' The magician performs his magic. He produces a
mango-tree which even bears mangoes. But this is all sleight of hand.
The magician alone is real.\"

5888. \"It seems that the whole of life is a long sleep. This much I
      understand, that we are not seeing things rightly. We perceive the
      world with a mind by which we cannot comprehend even the nature of
      the sky. So how can our perceptions be correct?\"

MASTER: \"There is another way of looking at it. We do not see the sky
rightly. It looks as if the sky were touching the ground at the horizon.
How can a man see correctly? His mind is delirious, like the mind of a
typhoid patient.\"

The Master sang in his sweet voice:

> *What a delirious fever is this that I suffer from!*
>
> *O Mother, Thy grace is my only cure. . . .*

Continuing, the Master said: \"Truly it is a state of themselves. No one
knows what they quarrel about. you!\' How much shouting! How much
abuse!\"

delirium. Just see how worldly men quarrel among Oh, how they quarrel!
\'May such and such a thing befall

23. \"I said to Kishori: The box is empty; there is nothing inside. But
    two men pull at it from either side, thinking the box contains
    money.\' Well, the body alone is the cause of all this mischief,
    isn\'t it? The jnanis see all this and say to themselves, \'What a
    relief one feels when this pillow-case of the body drops off.\'\"

The Master and M. went toward the Kāli temple.

MASTER: \"Why should you say such things? This world may be a \'frame
work of illusion\', but it is also said that it is a \'mansion of
mirth\'. Let the body remain. One can also turn this world into a
mansion of mirth.\"

23. \"But where is unbroken bliss in this world?\" MASTER: \"Yes, where
    is it?\"

Sri Ramakrishna stood in front of the shrine of Kāli and prostrated
himself before the Divine Mother. M. followed him. Then the Master sat
on the lower floor in front of the shrine room, facing the blissful
image, and leaned against a pillar of the natmandir. He wore a
red-bordered cloth, part of which was on his shoulder and back. M. sat
by his side.

23. \"Since there is no unbroken happiness in the world, why should one
    assume a body at all? I know that the body is meant only to reap the
    results of past action. But who knows what sort of action it is
    performing now? The unfortunate part is that we are being crushed.\"

MASTER: \"If a pea falls into filth, it grows into a pea-plant none the
less.\"

M: \"But still there are the eight bonds.\"

**Divine grace removes bondage**

MASTER: \"They are not eight bonds, but eight fetters. But what if they
are? These fetters fall off in a moment,

by the grace of God. Do you know what it is like? Suppose a room has
been kept dark a thousand years. The moment a man brings a light into
it, the darkness vanishes. Not little by little. Haven\'t you seen the
magician\'s feat? He takes string with many knots, and ties one end to
something, keeping the other in his hand. Then he shakes the string once
or twice, and immediately all the knots come undone. But another man
cannot untie the knots however he may try. All the knots of ignorance
come undone in the twinkling of an eye, through the guru\'s grace.

\"Well, can you tell me why Keshab Sen has changed so much lately? He
used to come here very often. He learnt here how to bow low before a
holy man. One day I told him that one should not salute a holy man as he
had been doing. Harish says rightly: \'All the cheques must be approved
here. Only then will they be cashed in the bank.\'\" (Laughter.)

M. listened to these words breathlessly. He began to realize that
Satchidananda, in the form of the guru, passes the \"cheque\".

MASTER: \"Do not reason. Who can ever know God? I have heard it from
Nangta, once for all, that this whole universe is only a fragment of
Brahman.

\"Hazra is given to too much calculation. He says, \'This much of God
has become the universe and this much is the balance.\' My head aches at
his calculations. I know that I know nothing. Sometimes I think of God
as good, and sometimes as bad. What can I know of Him?\"

23. \"It is true, sir. Can anyone ever know God? Each thinks, with his
    little bit of intelligence, that he has understood all of God. As
    you say, an ant went to a sugar hill and, finding that one grain of.
    sugar filled its stomach, thought that the next time it would take
    the entire hill into its hole.\"

**Surrender to the Divine Mother**

MASTER: \"Who can ever know God? I don\'t even try. I only call on Him
as Mother. Let Mother do whatever She likes. I shall know Her if it is
Her will; but I shall be happy to remain ignorant if She wills
otherwise. My nature is that of a kitten. It only cries, \'Mew, mew!\'
The rest it leaves to its mother. The mother cat puts the kitten
sometimes in the kitchen and sometimes on the master\'s bed. The young
child wants only his mother. He doesn\'t know how wealthy his mother is,
and he doesn\'t even want to know. He knows only, \'I have a mother; why
should I worry?\' Even the child of the maidservant knows that he has a
mother. If he quarrels with the son of the master, he says: \'I shall
tell my mother. I have a mother.\' My attitude, too, is that of a
child.\"

Suddenly Sri Ramakrishna caught M.\'s attention and said, touching his
own chest: \"Well, there must be something here. Isn\'t that so?\"

M. looked wonderingly at the Master. He said to himself: \"Does the
Mother Herself dwell in the Master\'s heart? Is it the Divine Mother who
has assumed this human body for the welfare of humanity?\"

Sri Ramakrishna was praying to the Divine Mother: \"O Mother! O
Embodiment of Om! Mother, how many things people say about Thee! But I
don\'t understand any of them. I don\'t know anything, Mother. I have
taken refuge at Thy feet. I have sought protection in Thee. O Mother, I
pray only that I may have pure love for Thy Lotus Feet, love that seeks
no return. And Mother, do not delude me with Thy world-bewitching maya.
I seek Thy protection. I have taken refuge in Thee.\"

The evening worship in the temples was over. Sri Ramakrishna was again
seated in his room with M.

M. had been visiting the Master for the past two years and, had received
his grace and blessings. He had been told that God was both with form
and without form, that He assumed forms for the sake of His devotees. To
the worshipper of the formless God, the Master said: \"Hold to your
conviction, but remember that all is possible with God. He has form, and
again, He is formless. He can be many things more.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"You have accepted an ideal, that of God without
form-isn\'t that so?\"

23. \"Yes, sir. But I also believe what you say-that all is possible
    with God. It is quite possible for God to have forms.

MASTER: \"Good. Remember further that, as Consciousness, He pervades the
entire universe of the living and non-living.\"

M: \"I think of Him as the consciousness in conscious beings.\"

MASTER: \"Stick to that ideal now. There is no need of tearing down and
changing one\'s attitude. You will gradually come to realize that the
consciousness in conscious beings is the Consciousness of God. He alone
is Consciousness.

\"Let me ask you one thing. Do you feel attracted to money and
treasures?\"

23. \"No, sir. But I think of earning money in order to be free from
    anxiety, to be able to think of God without worry.\"

MASTER: \"Oh, that\'s perfectly natural.\"

M: \"Is it greed? I don\'t think so.\"

MASTER: \"You are right. Otherwise, who will look after your children?
What will become of them if you feel that you are not the doer?\"

23. \"I have heard that one cannot attain Knowledge as long as one has
    the consciousness of duty. Duty is like the scorching sun.\"

MASTER: \"Keep your present attitude. It will be different when the
consciousness of duty drops away of itself.\"

They remained silent a few minutes.

23. \"To enter the world after attaining partial knowledge! Why, it is
    like dying in full consciousness, as in cholera!\"

MASTER: \"Oh, Ram! Ram!\"

The idea in M.\'s mind was that just as a cholera patient feels
excruciating pain at the time of death, because of retaining
consciousness, so also a Jnāni with partial knowledge must feel
extremely miserable leading the life of the world, which he knows to be
illusory.

M: \"People who are completely ignorant are like typhoid patients, who
remain unconscious at the time of death and so do not feel the pain.\"

MASTER: \"Tell me, what does one attain through money? Jaygopal Sen is
such a wealthy man; but he complains that his children don\'t obey
him.\"

23. \"Is poverty the only painful thing in the world? There are the six
    passions besides. Then disease and grief.\"

MASTER: \"And also name and fame, the desire to win people\'s
recognition. Well, what do you think my attitude is?\"

M: \"It is like that of a man just awakened from sleep. He becomes aware
of himself. You are always united

with God.\"

MASTER: \"Do you ever dream of me?\"

M: \"Yes, sir. Many times.\"

MASTER: \"How? Did you dream of me as giving you instruction?\"

M. remained silent.

MASTER: \"If you ever see me instructing you, then know that it is
Satchidananda Himself that does so.\"

M. related his dream experiences to Sri Ramakrishna, who listened to
them attentively.

MASTER (to M.): \"That is very good. Don\'t reason any more. You are a
follower of Śakti.\"

Wednesday, October 10, 1883

**Visit to Adhar\'s house**

Adhar had invited the Master to come to his house on the occasion of the
Durga Puja festival. It was the third day of the worship of the Divine
Mother. When Sri Ramakrishna arrived at Adhar\'s house, he found
Adhar\'s friend Sarada, Balarām\'s father, and Adhar\'s neighbours and
relatives waiting for him.

The Master went into the worship hall to see the evening worship. When
it was over, he remained standing there in an abstracted mood and sang
in praise of the Divine Mother:

> *Glories of the Divine Mother*
>
> *Out of my deep affliction rescue me, O Redeemer!*
>
> *Terrified by the threats of the King of Death am I!*
>
> *Left to myself, I shall perish soon;*
>
> *Save me, oh, save me now, I pray!*
>
> *Mother of all the worlds! Thou, the Support of mankind!*
>
> *Thou, the Bewitcher of all, the Mother of all that has life!*
>
> *Vrindāvan\'s charming Radha art Thou,*
>
> *Dearest playmate of Braja\'s Beloved.*
>
> *Blissful comrade of Krishna, well-spring of Krishna\'s lila, Child of
> Himālaya, best of the gopis, beloved of Govinda! Sacred Ganga, Giver
> of moksha!*
>
> *Śakti! The universe sings Thy praise.*
>
> *Thou art the Spouse of Śiva, the Ever-blessed, the All;*
>
> *Sometimes Thou takest form and sometimes art absolute.*
>
> *Eternal Beloved of Mahādeva,*
>
> *Who can fathom Thine infinite glories?*

The Master went to Adhar\'s drawing-room on the second floor and took a
seat, surrounded by the guests. Still in a mood of divine fervour, he
said: \"Gentlemen, I. have eaten. Now go and enjoy the feast.\" Was the
Master hinting that the Divine Mother had partaken of Adhar\'s offering?
Did he identify himself with the Divine Mother and therefore say, \"I
have eaten\"?

Then, addressing the Divine Mother, he continued: \"Shall I eat, O
Mother? Or will You eat? O Mother, the very Embodiment of the Wine of
Divine Bliss!\" Did the Master look on himself as one with the Divine
Mother? Had the Mother incarnated Herself as the Son to instruct mankind
in the ways of God? Was this why the Master said, \"I have eaten\"?

In that state of divine ecstasy Sri Ramakrishna saw the six centres in
his body, and the Divine Mother dwelling in them. He sang a song to that
effect.

Again he sang:

> *My mind is overwhelmed with wonder,*
>
> *Pondering the Mother\'s mystery;*
>
> *Her very name removes*
>
> *The fear of Kala, Death himself;*
>
> *Beneath Her feet lies Maha-Kala.*
>
> *Why should Her hue be kala, black?*
>
> *Many the forms of black, but She*
>
> *Appears astoundingly black;*
>
> *When contemplated in the heart,*
>
> *She lights the lotus that blossoms there.*
>
> *Her form is black, and She is named*
>
> *Kāli, the Black One. Blacker than black*
>
> *Is She! Beholding Her,*
>
> *Man is bewitched for evermore;*
>
> *No other form can he enjoy.*
>
> *In wonderment asks Ramprasad:*
>
> *Where dwells this Woman so amazing?*
>
> *At Her mere name, his mind*
>
> *Becomes at once absorbed in Her,*
>
> *Though he has never yet beheld Her.*

The fear of the devotees flies away if they but seek shelter at the feet
of the Divine Mother. Was that why the

Master sang the following song?:

> *I have surrendered my soul at the fearless feet of the Mother;*
>
> *Am I afraid of Death any more?*
>
> *Unto the tuft of hair on my head*
>
> *Is tied the almighty mantra, Mother Kāli\'s name.*
>
> *My body I have sold in the market-place of the world*
>
> *And with it have bought Sri Durga\'s name.*
>
> *Deep within my heart I have planted the name of Kāli,*
>
> *The Wish-fulfilling Tree of heaven;*
>
> *When Yama, King of Death, appears,*
>
> *To him I shall open my heart and show it growing there.*
>
> *I have cast out from me my six unflagging foes;*
>
> *Ready am I to sail life\'s sea,*
>
> *Crying, \"To Durga, victory!\"*

Sarada was stricken with grief on account of his son\'s death. So Adhar
had taken him to Dakshineswar to visit the Master. Sarada was a devotee
of Sri Chaitanya. Sri Ramakrishna looked at him and was inspired with
the ideal of Gaurānga.

He sang:

> *Why has My body turned so golden? It is not time for this to be:*
>
> *Many the ages that must pass, before as Gaurānga I appear.*
>
> *Here in the age of Dwapara My sport is not yet at an end;*
>
> *How strange this transformation is!*
>
> *The peacock glistens, all of gold; arid golden, too, the cuckoo
> gleams!*
>
> *Everything around Me here has turned to gold! Naught else appears*
>
> *But gold, whichever way I look.*
>
> *What can it mean, this miracle, that everything I see is gold?*

Ah, I can guess its meaning now:

> *Radha has come to Mathura, and that is why My skin is gold.*
>
> *For she is like the bhramara, and so has given Me her hue.*
>
> *Dark blue My body was but now; yet in the twinkling of an eye*
>
> *It turned to gold. Have I become Radha by contemplating her?*

23. *cannot imagine where I am-in Mathura or Navadvip. But how could
    > this have come to pass?*

> *Not yet is Balarama born as Nitai, nor has Nārada Become Srivas, nor
> Yaśoda as Mother Sachi yet returned.*
>
> *Then why should I, among them all, alone assume a golden face? Not
> yet is Father Nanda born as Jagannath; then why should I Be thus
> transmuted into gold?*
>
> *Perhaps because in Mathura sweet Radha has appeared, My skin Has
> borrowed Gaurānga\'s golden hue.*

Sri Ramakrishna sang again, still overpowered with the ideal of
Gaurānga:

> *Surely Gaurānga is lost in a state of blissful ecstasy;*
>
> *In an exuberance of joy, he laughs and weeps and dances and sings.*
>
> *He takes a wood for Vrindāvan, the Ganges for the blue Jamuna;*
>
> *Loudly he sobs and weeps. Yet, though he is all gold without,*
>
> *He is all black within-black with the blackness of Krishna!*

The Master continued to sing, assuming the attitude of a woman devotee
infatuated with love for Gaurānga:

> *Why do my neighbours raise such a scandal?*
>
> *Why do they cast aspersions upon me*
>
> *Simply because of Gaurānga?*
>
> *How can they understand my feelings?*
>
> *How can I ever explain?*
>
> *Can I ever explain at all?*
>
> *Alas, to whom shall I explain it?*
>
> *Ah, but they make me die of shame!*
>
> *Once on a time, at the house of Srivas,*
>
> *Gora was loudly singing the kirtan,*
>
> *When, on the ground of the courtyard,*
>
> *Falling, he rolled in an ecstasy.*
>
> *I, who was standing near him,*
>
> *Seeing him where he lay entranced.*
>
> *Was suddenly lost to outward sense.*
>
> *Until the wife of Srivas revived me.*

Another day, in the bhaktas\' procession,

> *Gora was sweetly singing the kirtan;*
>
> *Clasping the outcastes to him,*
>
> *He softened the unbelievers\' hearts.*
>
> *Through Nadia\'s market-place*
>
> *He chanted Lord Hari\'s holy name.*
>
> *I followed the throng, and from close by*
>
> *Caught a glimpse of his golden feet.*
>
> *Once by the Ganges\' bank he stood,*
>
> *His body bright as the sun and moon*
>
> *Charming all with his beauty.*
>
> *I too had come, to fetch some water,*
>
> *And, as I looked from one side,*
>
> *My water-jar slipped and fell to the ground.*
>
> *My sister-in-law, the gossip, saw me,*
>
> *And now she is spreading it everywhere.*

Balarām\'s father was a Vaishnava; hence the Master also sang of the
divine love of the gopis for their beloved

Krishna:

> *I have not found my Krishna, O friend! How cheerless my home without
> Him!*
>
> *Ah, if Krishna could only be the hair upon my head,*
>
> *Carefully I should braid it then, and deck it with bakul-flowers;*
>
> *Carefully I should fashion the braids out of my Krishna-hair.*
>
> *Krishna is black, and black is my hair; black would be one with
> black!*
>
> *Ah, if Krishna could only be the ring I wear in my nose,*
>
> *Always from my nose He would hang, and my two lips could touch Him.*
>
> *But it can never be, alas! Why should I idly dream?*
>
> *Why should Krishna care at all to be the ring in my nose?*
>
> *Ah, if Krishna could only be the bracelets on my arms,*
>
> *Always He would cling to my wrists, and proudly I should walk,*
>
> *Shaking my bracelets to make them sound, shaking my arms to show
> them;*
>
> *Down the king\'s highway I should walk, wearing my Krishn bracelets.*

Balarām\'s father was a wealthy man with estates in different parts of
Orissa. An orthodox member of the Vaishnava sect, he had built temples
and arranged for distribution of food to the pilgrims at various holy
places. He had been spending the last years of his life in Vrindāvan.
The Vaishnavas, for the most part, are bigoted in their religious views.
Some of them harbour malicious feelings toward the followers of the
Tantra and Vedānta. But Sri Ramakrishna never encouraged such a narrow
outlook. According to his teachings, through earnestness and yearning
all lovers of God will ultimately reach the same goal. The Master began
the conversation in order to broaden the religious views of Balarām\'s
father.

**Master\'s harmony of religions**

MASTER (to M.): \"Once I thought, \'Why should I be one-sided?\'
Therefore I was initiated into Vaishnavism in Vrindāvan and took the
garb of a Vaishnava monk. I spent three days practising the Vaishnava
discipline. Again, at Dakshineswar I was initiated into the mystery of
Rāmā worship. I painted my forehead with a long mark and put on a string
with a diamond round my neck. But after a few days I gave them up.

\"A certain man had a tub. People would come to him to have their
clothes dyed. The tub contained a solution of dye. Whatever colour a man
wanted for his cloth, he would get by dipping the cloth in the tub. One
man was amazed to see this and said to the dyer, \'Please give me the
dye you have in your tub.\' \"

Was the Master hinting that people professing different religions would
come to him and have their spiritual consciousness awakened according to
their own ideals?

MASTER (to Balarām\'s father): \"Don\'t read books any more. But you may
read books on devotion, such as the life of Chaitanya.

\"The whole thing is to love God and taste His sweetness. He is
sweetness and the devotee is its enjoyer. The devotee drinks the sweet
Bliss of God. Further, God is the lotus and the devotee the bee. The
devotee sips the honey of the lotus.

\"As a devotee cannot live without God, so also God cannot live without
His devotee. Then the devotee becomes the sweetness, and God its
enjoyer. The devotee becomes the lotus, and God the bee. It is the
Godhead that has become these two in order to enjoy Its own Bliss. That
is the significance of the episode of Radha and Krishna.

\"At the beginning of spiritual life the devotee should observe such
rites as pilgrimage, putting a string of beads around his neck, and so
forth. But outward ceremonies gradually drop off as he attains the goal,
the vision of God. Then his only activity is the repetition of God\'s
name, and contemplation and meditation on Him.

\"The pennies equivalent to sixteen rupees make a great heap. But
sixteen silver coins do not look like such a big amount. Again, the
quantity becomes much smaller when you change the sixteen rupees into
one gold mohur. And if you change the gold into a tiny piece of diamond,
people hardly notice it.\"

Orthodox Vaishnavas insist on the outer insignia of religion. They
criticize any devotee who does not wear these marks. Was that why the
Master said that, after the vision of God, a devotee becomes indifferent
to outer marks, giving up formal worship when the goal of spiritual life
is attained?

MASTER (to Balarām\'s father): \"The Kartabhajas group the devotees into
four classes: the pravartaka, the sadhaka, the siddha, and the siddha of
the siddha. The pravartaka, the beginner, puts the mark of his religion
on his forehead, wears a string of beads around his neck, and observes
other outer conventions. The sadhaka, the struggling devotee, does not
care so much for elaborate rites. An example of this class is the Baul.
The siddha, the perfect, firmly believes that God exists. The siddha of
the siddha, the supremely perfect, like Chaitanya, not only has realized
God but also has become intimate with Him and talks with Him all the
time. This is the last limit of realization.

**Different classes of spiritual aspirants**

\"There are many kinds of spiritual aspirants. Those endowed with sattva
perform their spiritual practices secretly. They look like ordinary
people, but they meditate inside the mosquito net.

\"Aspirants endowed with rajas exhibit outward pomp-a string of beads
around the neck, a mark on the forehead, an ochre robe, a silk cloth, a
rosary with a gold bead, and so on. They are like stall-keepers
advertising their wares with signboards.

\"All religions and all paths call upon their followers to pray to one
and the same God. Therefore one should not show disrespect to any
religion or religious opinion. It is God alone who is called
Satchidananda Brahman in the Vedas, Satchidananda Krishna in the
Puranas, and Satchidananda Śiva in the Tantras. It is one and the same
Satchidananda.

\"There are different sects of Vaishnavas. That which is called Brahman
in the Vedas is called Ālekh-Niranjan by one Vaishnava sect. \'Ālekh\'
means That which cannot be pointed out or perceived by the sense-organs.
According to this sect, Radha and Krishna are only two bubbles of the
Ālekh.

\"According to the Vedānta, there is no Incarnation of God. The
Vedantists say that Rāmā and Krishna are but two waves in the Ocean of
Satchidananda.

\"In reality there are not two. There is only One. A man may call on God
by any name; if he is sincere in his prayer he will certainly reach Him.
He will succeed if he has longing.\"

As Sri Ramakrishna spoke these words to the devotees, he was overwhelmed
with divine fervour. Coming down to partial consciousness of the world,
he said to Balarām\'s father, \"Are you the father of Balarām?\"

All sat in silence. Balarām\'s aged father was silently telling his
beads.

**Futility of worship without yearning**

MASTER (to M. and the others): \"Well, these people practise so much
japa and go to so many sacred places, but why are they like this? Why,
do they make no progress? In their case it seems as if the year consists
of eighteen months.

\"Once I said to Harish: \'What is the use of going to Benares if one
does not feel restless for God? And if one feels that longing, then this
very place is Benares.\'

\"They make so many pilgrimages and repeat the name of God so much, but
why do they not realize anything? It is because they have no longing for
God. God reveals Himself to the devotee if only he calls upon Him with a
longing heart.

\"At the beginning of a yatra performance much light-hearted
restlessness is to be observed on the stage. At that time one does not
see Krishna. Next the sage Nārada enters with his flute and sings
longingly, \'O Govinda! O my Life! O my Soul!\' Then Krishna can no
longer remain away and appears with the cowherd boys.\"

**Tuesday, October 16, 1883**

Sri Ramakrishna was in his room with Rākhāl , Balarām\'s father, Beni
Pāl, M., Mani Mallick, Ishan, Kishori, and other devotees.

MASTER: \"Liberal-minded devotees accept all the forms of God: Krishna,
Kāli, Śiva, Rāmā, and so on.\"

BALARĀM\'S FATHER: \"Yes, sir. It is like a woman\'s recognizing her
husband, whatever clothes he wears.\"

**Unwavering devotion to God**

MASTER: \"But again, there is a thing called nishtha, single-minded
devotion. When the gopis went to Mathura they saw Krishna with a turban
on His head. At this they pulled down their veils and said, \'Who is
this man? Where is our Krishna with the peacock feather on His crest and
the yellow cloth on His body?\' Hanuman also had that unswerving
devotion. He came to Dwaraka in the cycle of Dwapara. Krishna said to
Rukmini, His queen, \'Hanuman will not be satisfied unless he sees the
form of Rāmā.\' So, to please Hanuman, Krishna assumed the form of Rāma.

\"But, my dear sir, I am in a peculiar state of mind. My mind constantly
descends from the Absolute to the Relative, and again ascends from the
Relative to the Absolute.

\"The attainment of the Absolute is called the Knowledge of Brahman. But
it is extremely difficult to acquire. A man cannot acquire the Knowledge
of Brahman unless he completely rids himself of his attachment to the
world. When the Divine Mother was born as the daughter of King Himalaya,
She showed Her various forms to Her father. The king said, \'I want to
see Brahman.\' Thereupon the Divine Mother said: \'Father, if that is
your desire, then you must seek the company of holy men. You must go
into solitude, away from the world, and now and then live in holy
company.\'

**The many and the One**

\"The manifold has come from the One alone, the Relative from the
Absolute. There is a state of consciousness where the many disappears,
and the One, as well; for the many must exist as long as the One exists.
Brahman is without comparison. It is impossible to explain Brahman by
analogy. It is between light and darkness. It is Light, but not the
light that we perceive, not material light.

\"Again, when God changes the state of my mind, when He brings my mind
down to the plane of the Relative, I perceive that it is He who has
become all these-the Creator, maya, the living beings, and the universe.

\"Again, sometimes He shows me that He has created the universe and all
living beings. He is the Master, and the universe His garden.

**Knowledge and ignorance**

\"\'He is the Master, and the universe and all its living beings belong
to Him\'-that is Knowledge. And, \'I am the doer\', \'I am the guru\',
\'I am the father\'-that is ignorance. \'This is my house; this is my
family; this is my wealth; these are my relatives\'-this also is
ignorance.\"

BALARĀM\'S FATHER: \"That is true, sir.\"

MASTER: \"As long as you do not feel that God is the Master, you must
come back to the world, you must be born again and again. There will be
no rebirth when you can truly say, \'O God, Thou art the Master.\' As
long as you cannot say, \'O Lord, Thou alone art real\', you will not be
released from the life of the world. This going and coming, this
rebirth, is inevitable. There will be no liberation. Further, what can
you achieve by saying, \'It is mine\'? The manager of an estate may say,
\'This is our garden; these are our couches and furniture.\' But when he
is dismissed by the master, he hasn\'t the right to take away even a
chest of worthless mango-wood given to him for his use.

\"The feeling of \'I and mine\' has covered the Reality. Because of this
we do not see Truth. Attainment of Chaitanya, Divine Consciousness, is
not possible without the knowledge of Advaita, Non-duality. After
realizing Chaitanya one enjoys Nityananda, Eternal Bliss. One enjoys
this Bliss after attaining the state of a paramahamsa.

\"Vedānta does not recognize the Incarnation of God. According to it,
Chaitanyadeva is only a bubble of the non-dual Brahman.

\"Do you know what the vision of Divine Consciousness is like? It is
like the sudden illumination of a dark room when a match is struck.

\"The Incarnation of God is accepted by those who follow the path of
bhakti. A woman belonging to the Kartabhaja sect observed my condition,
and remarked: \'You have inner realization. Don\'t dance and sing too
much. Ripe grapes must be preserved carefully in cotton. The
mother-in-law lessens her daughter-in-law\'s activities when the
daughter-in-law is with child. One characteristic of God-realization is
that the activities of a man with such realization gradually drop away.
Inside this man \[meaning Sri Ramakrishna\] is the real Jewel.\'

\"Watching me eat, she remarked, \'Sir, are you yourself eating, or are
you feeding someone else?\'

\"The feeling of ego has covered the Truth. Narendra once said, \'As the
\"I\" of man recedes, the \"I\" of God approaches.\' Kedār says, \'The
more clay there is in the jar, the less water it holds.\'

\"Krishna said to Arjuna: \'Brother, you will not realize Me if you
possess even one of the eight siddhis.\' These give only a little power.
With healing and the like one may do only a little good to others.
Isn\'t that true?

\"Therefore I prayed to the Divine Mother for pure love only, a love
that does not seek any return. I never, asked for occult powers.\"

While talking thus, Sri Ramakrishna went into samādhi. He sat there
motionless, completely forgetful of the outer world. Then, coming down
to the sense world, he sang:

> *Ah, friend! I have not found Him yet, whose love has driven me mad. .
> . .*

At the Master\'s request, Ramlal sang a song describing how Chaitanya
embraced the monastic life:

> *Oh, what a vision I have beheld in Keshab Bharati\'s hut!*
>
> *Gora, in all his matchless grace,*
>
> *Shedding tears in a thousand streams!*
>
> *Like a mad elephant*
>
> *He dances in ecstasy and sings,*
>
> *Drunk with an overwhelming love.*
>
> *Rolling flat upon the ground and swimming in his tears,*
>
> *He weeps and shouts Lord Hari\'s name,*
>
> *Piercing the very heavens with his cries,*
>
> *Loud as a lion\'s roar;*
>
> *Then most humbly he begs men\'s love,*
>
> *To feel himself the servant of Cod.*
>
> *Shorn of his locks, he has put on the yogi\'s ochre robe;*
>
> *Even the hardest heart must melt*
>
> *To see his pure and heavenly love.*
>
> *Smitten by man\'s deep woe,*
>
> *He has abandoned everything*
>
> *And pours out love unstintingly.*
>
> *Oh, would that Premdas were his slave and, passing from door to door,
> Might sing Gaurānga\'s endless praise!*

The Master asked Mani Mallick to quote the words of Tulsidas to the
effect that one who had developed love of God could not observe caste
distinctions.

MANI: \"The throat of the chatak bird is pierced with thirst. All around
are the waters of the Ganges, the Jamuna, the Saraju, and of innumerable
other rivers and lakes; but the bird will not touch any of these. It
only looks up expectantly for the rain that falls when the star Svati is
in the ascendant.\"

MASTER: \"That means that love for the Lotus Feet of God is alone real,
and all else illusory.\"

MANI: \"Tulsi also said: \'At the touch of the philosopher\'s stone, the
eight metals become gold. Likewise all castes, even the butcher and the
untouchable, become pure by repeating Hari\'s name. Without Hari\'s name
the people of the four castes are but butchers.\'\"

MASTER: \"The hide that the scriptures forbid one to touch can be taken
inside the temple after it has been tanned.

**Chanting God\'s holy name**

\"Man becomes pure by repeating the name of God. Therefore one should
practise the chanting of God\'s name. I said to Jadu Mallick\'s mother:
\'In the hour of death you will think only of worldly things-of family,
children, executing the will, and so forth. The thought of God will not
come to your mind. The way to remember God in the hour of death is to
practise, now, the repetition of His name and the chanting of His
glories. If one keeps up this practice, then in the hour of death one
will repeat the name of God. When the cat pounces upon the bird, the
bird only squawks and does not say, \'Rāma, Rāma, Hare-Krishna\'.

\"It is good to prepare for death. One should constantly think of God
and chant His name in solitude during the last years of one\'s life. If
the elephant is put into the stable after its bath it is not soiled
again by dirt and dust.\"

Balarām\'s father, Mani Mallick, and Beni Pāl were all elderly men. Did
the Master give this instruction especially for their benefit?

MASTER: \"Why do I ask you to think of God and chant His name in
solitude? Living in the world day and night, one suffers from worries.
Haven\'t you noticed brother killing brother for a foot of land? The
Sikhs said to me, \'The cause of all worry and confusion is these three:
land, woman, and money.\'

\"You are leading a householder\'s life. Why should you be afraid of the
world? When Rāma said to Dasaratha that He was going to renounce the
world, it worried His father, and the king sought counsel of Vasishtha.
Vasishtha said to Rāma: \'Rāma, why should You give up the world? Reason
with me; Is this world outside God? What is there to renounce and what
is there to accept? Nothing whatever exists but God. It is Brahman alone
that appears as Isvara, maya, living beings, and the universe.\' \"

BALARĀM\'S FATHER: \"It is very difficult, sir.\"

MASTER: \"The aspirant, while practising spiritual discipline, looks
upon the world as a \'framework of illusion\'. Again, after the
attainment of Knowledge, the vision of God, this very world becomes to
him a \'mansion of mirth\'.

\"It is written in the books of the Vaishnavas: \'God can be attained
through faith alone; reasoning pushes Him far away.\' Faith alone!

\"What faith Krishnakishore had! At Vrindāvan a low-caste man drew water
for him from a well. Krishnakishore said to him, \'Repeat the name of
Śiva.\' After the man had repeated the name of Śiva, Krishnakishore
unhesitatingly drank the water. He used to say, \'If a man chants the
name of God, does he need to spend money any more for the atonement of
his sins? How foolish!\' He was amazed to see people worshipping God
with the sacred tulsi-leaf in order to get rid of their illnesses. At
the bathing-ghat here he said to us, \'Please bless me, that I may pass
my days repeating Rāma\'s holy name.\' Whenever I went to his house he
would dance with joy at the sight of me. Rāma said to Lakshmana,
\'Brother, whenever you find people singing and dancing in the ecstasy
of divine love, know for certain that I am there.\' Chaitanya is an
example of such ecstatic love. He laughed and wept and danced and sang
in divine ecstasy. He was an Incarnation. God incarnated Himself through
Chaitanya.\"

Sri Ramakrishna sang a song describing the divine love of Chaitanya.
Then Balarām\'s father, Mani Mallick, Beni Pāl, and several other
devotees took leave of the Master.

In the evening, devotees from Kansaritola, Calcutta, arrived. The Master
danced and sang with them in a state of divine fervour. After dancing,
he went into a spiritual mood and said, \"I shall go part of the way
myself.\" Kishori came forward to massage his feet, but the Master did
not allow anyone to touch him.

Ishan arrived. The Master was seated, still in a spiritual mood. After a
while he became engaged in talk with Ishan. It was Ishan\'s desire to
practise the Purascharana of the Gayatri.

MASTER (to Ishan): \"Follow your own intuition. I hope there is no more
doubt in your mind. Is there any? The path of the Vedas is not meant for
the Kaliyuga. The path of Tantra is efficacious.\"

ISHAN: \"I have almost resolved to perform an atonement ceremony.\"

MASTER: \"Do you mean to say that one cannot follow the path of Tantra?
That which is Brahman is also Śakti, Kāli. Knowing the secret that Kāli
is one with the highest Brahman, I have discarded, once for all, both
righteousness and sin.\"

ISHAN: \"It is mentioned in a hymn in the Chandi that Brahman alone is
the Primal Energy. Brahman is identical with Śakti.\"

MASTER: \"It will not do simply to express that idea in words. Only when
you assimilate it will all be well with you.

\"When the heart becomes pure through the practice of spiritual
discipline, then one rightly feels that God alone is the Doer. He alone
has become mind, life, and intelligence. We are only His instruments.
Thou it is that holdest the elephant in the mire; Thou, that helpest the
lame man scale the loftiest hill.

\"When your heart becomes pure, then you will realize that it is God who
makes us perform such rites as the Purascharana.

*Thou workest Thine own work; men only call it theirs.*

\"All doubts disappear after the realization of God. Then the devotee
meets the favourable wind. He becomes free from worry. He is like the
boatman who, when the favourable wind blows, unfurls the sail, holds the
rudder lightly, and enjoys a smoke.\"

Ishan took his leave and Sri Ramakrishna talked with M. No one else was
present. He asked M. what he thought of Narendra, Rākhāl , Adhar, and
Hazra, and whether they were guileless. \"And\", asked the Master,
\"what do you think of me?\" .

M. said: \"You are simple and at the same time deep. It is extremely
difficult to understand you.\"

Sri Ramakrishna laughed.

**November 26, 1883**

It was the day of the annual festival of the Sinduriapatti Brahmo Samaj.
The ceremony was to be performed in Manilal Mallick\'s house. The
worship hall was beautifully decorated with flowers, wreaths, and
evergreens, and many devotees were assembled, eagerly awaiting the
worship. Their enthusiasm had been greatly heightened by the news that
Sri Ramakrishna was going to grace the occasion with his presence.
Keshab, Vijay, Shivanath, and other leaders of the Brahmo Samaj held him
in high respect. His God intoxicated state of mind, his intense love of
spiritual life, his burning faith, his intimate communion with God, and
his respect for women, whom he regarded as veritable manifestations of
the Divine Mother, together with the unsullied purity of his character,
his complete renunciation of worldly talk, his love and respect for all
religious faiths, and his eagerness to meet devotees of all creeds,
attracted the members of the Brahmo Samaj to him. Devotees came that day
from far-off places to join the festival, for it would give them a
chance to get a glimpse of the Master and listen to his inspiring talk.

Sri Ramakrishna arrived at the house before the worship began, and
became engaged in conversation with Vijaykrishna Goswami and the other
devotees. The lamps were lighted and the divine service was about to
begin.

The Master asked if Shivanath would come to the festival. A Brahmo
devotee said that he had other important things to do and was not
coming.

**Truthfulness leads to God**

MASTER: \"I feel very happy when I see Shivanath. He always seems to be
absorbed in the bliss of bhakti. Further, a man who is respected by so
many surely possesses some divine power. But he has one great defect: he
doesn\'t keep his word. Once he said to me that, he would come to
Dakshineswar, but he neither came nor sent me word. That is not good. It
is said that truthfulness alone constitutes the spiritual discipline of
the Kaliyuga. If a man clings tenaciously to truth he ultimately
realizes God. Without this regard for truth, one gradually loses
everything. If by chance I say that I will go to the pine-grove, I must
go there even if there is no further need of it, lest I lose my
attachment to truth. After my vision of the Divine Mother, I prayed to
Her, taking a flower in my hands: \'Mother, here is Thy knowledge and
here is Thy ignorance. Take

them both, and give me only pure love. Here is Thy holiness and here is
Thy unholiness. Take them both, Mother, and give me pure love. Here is
Thy good and here is Thy evil. Take them both, Mother, and give me pure
love. Here is Thy righteousness, and here is Thy unrighteousness. Take
them both, Mother, and give me pure love.\' I mentioned all these, but I
could not say: \'Mother, here is Thy truth and here is Thy falsehood.
Take them both.\' I gave up everything at Her feet but could not bring
myself to give up truth.\"

Soon the service began according to the rules of the Brahmo Samaj. The
preacher was seated on the dais. After the opening prayer he recited
holy texts of the Vedas and was joined by the congregation in the
invocation to the Supreme Brahman. They chanted in chorus: \"Brahman is
Truth, Knowledge, and Infinity. It shines as Bliss and Immortality.
Brahman is Peace, Blessedness, the One without a Second; It is pure and
unstained by sin.\" The minds of the devotees were stilled, and they
closed their eyes in meditation.

The Master went into deep samādhi. He sat there transfixed and
speechless. After some time he opened his eyes, looked around, and
suddenly stood up with the words \"Brahma! Brahma!\" on his lips. Soon
the devotional music began, accompanied by drums and cymbals. In a state
of divine fervour the Master began to dance with the devotees. Vijay and
the other Brahmos danced around him. The guests and the devotees were
enchanted. Many of them drank the sweet bliss of God\'s name and forgot
the world. The happiness of the material world appeared bitter to them,
at least for the time being. After the kirtan all sat around the Master,
eager to hear his words.

**Advice to householders**

MASTER: \"It is difficult to lead the life of a householder in a spirit
of detachment. Once Pratap said to me: \'Sir, we follow the example of
King Janaka. He led the life of a householder in a detached spirit. We
shall follow him.\' I said to him: \'Can one be like King Janaka by
merely wishing it? How many austerities he practised in order to acquire
divine knowledge! He practised the most intense form of asceticism for
many years and only then returned to the life of the world.\'

\"Is there, then, no hope for householders? Certainly there is. They
must practise spiritual discipline in solitude for some days. Thus they
will acquire knowledge and devotion. Then it will not hurt them to lead
the life of the world. But when you practise discipline in solitude,
keep yourself entirely away from your family. You must not allow your
wife, son, daughter, mother, father, sister, brother, friends, or
relatives near you. While thus practising discipline in solitude, you
should think: \'I have no one else in the world. God is my all.\' You
must also pray to Him, with tears in your eyes, for knowledge and
devotion.

\"If you ask me how long you should live in solitude away from your
family, I should say that it would be good for you if you could spend
even one day in such a manner. Three days at a time are still better.
One may live in solitude for twelve days, a month, three months, or a
year, according to one\'s convenience and ability. One hasn\'t much to
fear if one leads the life of a householder after attaining knowledge
and devotion.

\"If you break a jack-fruit after rubbing your hands with oil, then its
sticky milk will not smear your hands. While playing the game of
hide-and-seek, you are safe if you but once touch the \'granny\'. Be
turned into gold by touching the philosopher\'s stone. After that you
may remain buried underground a thousand years; when you are taken out
you will still be gold.

\"The mind is like milk. If you keep the mind in the world, which is
like water, then the milk and water will get mixed. That is why people
keep milk in a quiet place and let it set into curd, and then churn
butter from it. Likewise, through spiritual discipline practised in
solitude, churn the butter of knowledge and devotion from the milk of
the mind. Then that butter can easily be kept in the water of the world.
It will not get mixed with the world. The mind will float detached on
the water of the world.\"

Vijay had just returned from Gaya, where he had spent a long time in
solitude and holy company. He had put on the ochre robe of a monk and
was in an exalted state of mind, always indrawn. He was sitting before
the Master with his head bent down, as if absorbed in some deep thought.

Casting his benign glance on Vijay, the Master said: \"Vijay, have you
found your room?

\"Let me tell you a parable: Once two holy men, in the course of their
wanderings, entered a city. One of them, with wondering eyes and mouth
agape, was looking at the market-place, the stalls, and the buildings,
when he met his companion. The latter said: \'You seem to be filled with
wonder at the city. Where is your baggage?\' He replied: \'First of all
I found a room. I put my things in it, locked the door, and felt totally
relieved. Now I am going about the city enjoying all the fun.\'

\"So I am asking you, Vijay, if you have found your room. (To M. and the
others) You see, the spring in Vijay\'s heart has been covered all these
days. Now it is open. . .

(To V ijay) \"Well, Shivanath is always in trouble and turmoil. He has
to write for magzines and perform many other duties. Worldly duties
bring much worry and anxiety along with them.

\"It is narrated in the Bhagavata that the Avadhuta had twenty-four
gurus, one of whom was a kite. In a certain place the fishermen were
catching fish. A kite swooped down and snatched a fish. At the sight of
the fish, about a thousand crows chased the kite and made a great noise
with their cawing. Whichever way the kite flew with the fish, the crows
followed it. The kite flew to the south and the crows followed it there.
The kite flew to the north and still the crows followed after it. The
kite went east and west, but with the same result. As the kite began to
fly about in confusion, lo, the fish dropped from its mouth. The crows
at once let the kite alone and flew after the fish. Thus relieved of its
worries, the kite sat on the branch of a tree and thought: \'That
wretched fish was at the root of all my troubles. I have now got rid of
it and therefore I am at peace.\'

\"The Avadhuta learnt this lesson from the kite, that as long as a man
has the fish, that is, worldly desires, he must perform actions and
consequently suffer from worry, anxiety, and restlessness. No sooner
does he renounce these desires than his activities fall away and he
enjoys peace of soul.

\"But work without any selfish motive is good. It does not create any
worry. But it is very difficult to be totally unselfish. We may think
that our work is selfless, but selfishness comes, unknown to us, from no
one knows where. But if a man has already undergone great spiritual
discipline, then as a result of it he may be able to do work without any
selfish motive. After the vision of God a man can easily do unselfish
work. In most cases action drops away after the attainment of God. Only
a few, like Nārada, work to bring light to mankind.

\"The Avadhuta accepted a bee as another teacher. Bees accumulate their
honey by days of hard labour. But they cannot enjoy their honey, for a
man soon breaks the comb and takes it away. The Avadhuta learnt this
lesson from the bees, that one should not lay things up. Sādhus should
depend one hundred per cent on God. They must not gather for the morrow.
But this does not apply to the householder. He must bring up his family;
therefore it is necessary for him to provide. Birds and monks do not
hoard. Yet birds also hoard after their chicks are hatched: they collect
food in their beaks for their young ones.

\"Let me tell you one thing, Vijay. Don\'t trust a sādhu if he keeps
bag, and baggage with him and a bundle of clothes with many knots. I
have seen such sādhus under the banyan tree in the Panchavati. Two or
three of them were seated there. One was picking over lentils, some were
sewing their clothes, and all were gossiping about a feast they had
enjoyed in a rich man\'s house. They said among themselves, \'That rich
man spent a hundred thousand rupees on the feast and fed the sādhus
sumptuously with cake, sweets, and many such delicious things.\' \" (All
laugh)

VIJAY: \"It is true, sir. \"I have seen such sādhus at Gaya. They are
called the lotawalla sādhus of Gaya.\"

MASTER (to Vijay): \"When love of God is awakened, work drops away of
itself. If God makes some men work, let them work. It is now time for
you to give up everything. Renounce all and say, \'O mind, may you and I
alone behold the Mother, letting no One else intrude.\' \"

Saying this, Sri Ramakrishna began to sing in his soul-enthralling
voice:

> *Cherish my precious Mother Syama*
>
> *Tenderly within, O mind;*
>
> *May you and I alone behold Her,*
>
> *Letting no one else intrude.*
>
> *O mind, in solitude enjoy Her,*
>
> *Keeping the passions all outside;*
>
> *Take but the tongue, that now and again*
>
> *It may cry out, \"O Mother! Mother!\"*
>
> *Suffer no breath of base desire*
>
> *To enter and approach us there,*
>
> *But bid true knowledge stand on guard,*
>
> *Alert and watchful evermore.*

The Master said to Vijay: \"Surrender yourself completely to God, and
set aside all such things as fear and shame. Give up such feelings as,
\'What will people think of me if I dance in the ecstasy of God\'s holy
name?\' The saying, \'One cannot have the vision of God as long as one
has these three- shame, hatred, and fear\', is very true. Shame, hatred,
fear, caste, pride, secretiveness, and the like are so many bonds. Man
is free when he is liberated from all these.

\"When bound by ties one is jiva, and when free from ties one is Śiva.
Prema, ecstatic love of God, is a rare thing.

**Steps of bhakti**

\"First of all one acquires bhakti. Bhakti is single-minded devotion to
God, like the devotion a wife feels for her husband. It is very
difficult to have unalloyed devotion to God. Through such devotion
one\'s mind and soul merge in Him.

\"Then comes bhava, intense love. Through bhava a man becomes
speechless. His nerve currents are stilled.

Kumbhaka comes by itself. It is like the case of a man whose breath and
speech stop when he fires a gun.

\"But prema, ecstatic love, is an extremely rare thing. Chaitanya had
that love. When one has prema one forgets all outer things. One forgets
the world. One even forgets one\'s own body, which is so dear to a
man.\"

The Master began to sing:

> *Oh, when will dawn the blessed day*
>
> *When tears of joy will flow from my eyes*
>
> *As I repeat Lord Hari\'s name?*
>
> *Oh, when will dawn the blessed day*
>
> *When all my craving for the world*
>
> *Will vanish straightway from my heart,*
>
> *And with the thrill of His holy name*
>
> *All of my hair will stand on end?*
>
> *Oh, when will dawn that blessed day?*

So the talk of divine things was proceeding, when some invited Brahmo
devotees entered the room. There were among them a few pundits and high
government officials.

Sri Ramakrishna had said that bhava stills the nerve currents of the
devotee. He continued: \"When Arjuna was about to shoot at the target,
the eye of a fish, his eyes were fixed on the eye of the fish, and on
nothing

else. He didn\'t even notice any part of the fish except the eye. In
such a state the breathing stops and one experiences kumbhaka.

\"Another characteristic of God-vision is that a great spiritual current
rushes up along the spine and goes toward the brain. If then the devotee
goes into samādhi, he sees God.\"

Looking at the Brahmo devotees who had just arrived, the Master said:
\"Mere pundits, devoid of divine love,

talk incoherently. Pundit Samadhyayi once said, in the course of his
sermon: \'God is dry. Make Him sweet by your love and devotion.\'
Imagine! To describe Him, as dry, whom the Vedas declare as the Essence
of Bliss! It makes one feel that the pundit didn\'t know what God really
is. That was why his words were so incoherent.

\"A man once said, \'There are many horses in my uncle\'s cow-shed.\'
From that one could know that the man had no horses at all. No one keeps
a horse in a cow-shed.

**Transitoriness of earthly things**

\"Some people pride themselves on their riches and power-their wealth,
honour, and social position. But these are only transitory. Nothing will
remain with you in death.

\"There is a song that runs:

> *Remember this, O mind! Nobody is your own:*
>
> *Vain is your wandering in this world.*
>
> *Trapped in the subtle snare of maya as you are,*
>
> *Do not forget the Mother\'s name.*
>
> *Only a day or two men honour you on earth*
>
> *As lord and master; all too soon*
>
> *That form, so honoured now, must needs be cast away,*
>
> *When Death, the Master, seizes you.*
>
> *Even your beloved wife, for whom, while yet you live,*
>
> *You fret yourself almost to death,*
>
> *Will not go with you then; she too will say farewell,*
>
> *And shun your corpse as an evil thing.*

\"One must not be proud of one\'s money. If you say that you are rich,
then one can remind you that there are richer men than you, and others
richer still, and so on. At dusk the glow-worm comes out and thinks that
it lights the world. But its pride is crushed when the stars appear in
the sky. The stars feel that they give light to the earth. But when the
moon rises the stars fade in shame. The moon feels that the world smiles
at its light and that it lights the earth. Then the eastern horizon
becomes red, and the sun rises. The moon fades and after a while is no
longer seen.

\"If wealthy people would think that way, they would get rid of their
pride in their wealth.\"

Manilal had provided a sumptuous feast in celebration of the festival.
He entertained the Master and the other guests with great love and
attention. It was late at night when they returned to their homes.

> \-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--

**Chapter 15**

LAST VISIT TO KESHAB

> Wednesday, November 28, 1883

AT TWO O\'CLOCK in the afternoon, M. was pacing the foot-path of the
Circular Road in front of the Lily Cottage, where Keshab Chandra Sen
lived. He was eagerly awaiting the arrival of Sri Ramakrishna. Keshab\'s
illness had taken a serious turn, and there was very little chance of
his recovery. Since the Master loved Keshab dearly, he was coming from
Dakshineswar to pay him a visit.

On the east side of the Circular Road was Victoria College, where the
ladies of Keshab\'s Brahmo Samaj and their daughters received their
education. To the north of the college was a spacious garden house
inhabited by an English family. M. noticed that there was a commotion in
the house and wondered what was going on. Presently a hearse arrived
with the drivers dressed in black, and the members of the household
appeared, looking very sad. There had been a death in the family.

\"Whither does the soul go, leaving behind this mortal body?\" Pondering
the age-old question, M. waited, watching the carriages that came from
the north.

**Master\'s visit to Keshab**

About five o\'clock a carriage stopped in front of the Lily Cottage and
Sri Ramakrishna got out with Lātu and several other devotees, including
Rākhāl . He was received by Keshab\'s relatives, who led him and the
devotees upstairs to the verandah south of the drawing-room. The Master
seated himself on a couch.

After a long wait he became impatient to see Keshab. Keshab\'s disciples
said that he was resting and would be there presently. Sri Ramakrishna
became more and more impatient and said to Keshab\'s disciples: \"Look
here, what need is there of his coming to me? Why can\'t I go in and see
him?\"

PRASANNA (humbly): \"Sir, he will come in a few minutes.\"

MASTER: \"Go away! It is you who are making all this fuss. Let me go
in.\"

Prasanna began to talk about Keshab in order to divert the Master\'s
attention. He said: \"Keshab is now an altogether different person. Like
you, sir, he talks to the Divine Mother. He hears what the Mother says,
and laughs and cries.\"

When he was told that Keshab talked to the Divine Mother and laughed and
cried, the Master became ecstatic.

Presently he went into samādhi.

It was winter and the Master was wearing a green flannel coat with a
shawl thrown over it. He sat straight, with his eyes fixed, deep in
ecstasy. A long time passed in this way. There was no indication of his
returning to the normal plane of consciousness.

Gradually it became dark. Lamps were lighted in the drawing-room, where
the Master was now to go. While he was slowly coming down to the plane
of ordinary consciousness, he was taken there, though with great
difficulty. The room was well furnished. At the sight of the furniture,
the Master muttered to himself, \"These things were necessary before,
but of what use are they now?\" Seeing Rākhāl , he said, \"Oh, hello!
Are you here?\" Then, seating himself on a couch, he again lost
consciousness of the outer world, and, looking around as if seeing
someone, he said: \"Hello, Mother! I see that You too have come. How You
are showing off in Your Benares sari! Don\'t bother me now, please. Sit
down and be quiet.\"

The Master was in a state of intense divine intoxication. In the
well-lighted room the Brahmo devotees sat around the Master; Lātu,
Rākhāl , and M. remained near him. He was saying to himself, still
filled with divine

fervour: \"The body and the soul! The body was born and it will die. But
for the soul there is no death. It is like the betel-nut. When the nut
is ripe it does not stick to the shell. But when it is green it is
difficult to separate it from the shell. After realizing God, one does
not identify oneself any more with the body. Then one knows that body
and soul are two different things.\"

**Keshab\'s serious illness**

At this moment Keshab entered the room. He came through the east door.
Those who remembered the man who had preached in the Town Hall or the
Brahmo Samaj temple were shocked to see this skeleton covered with skin.
He could hardly stand. He walked holding to the wall for support. With
great difficulty he sat down in front of the couch. In the mean time Sri
Ramakrishna had got down from the couch and was sitting on the floor.
Keshab bowed low before the Master and remained in that position a long
time, touching the Master\'s feet with his forehead. Then he sat up. Sri
Ramakrishna was still in a state of ecstasy. He muttered to himself. He
talked to the Divine Mother.

Raising his voice, Keshab said: \"I am here, sir. I am here.\" He took
Sri Ramakrishna\'s left hand and stroked it gently. But the Master was
in deep samādhi, completely intoxicated with divine love. A stream of
words came from his lips as he talked to himself, and the devotees
listened to him spellbound.

**Brahman manifesting Itself as the universe**

MASTER: \"As long as a man associates himself with upadhis, so long he
sees the manifold, such as Keshab, Prasanna, Amrita, and so on; but on
attaining Perfect Knowledge he sees only one Consciousness everywhere.
The same Perfect Knowledge, again, makes him realize that the one
Consciousness has become the universe and its living beings and the
twenty-four cosmic principles. But the manifestations of Divine Power
are different in different beings. It is He, undoubtedly, who has become
everything; but in some cases there is a greater manifestation than in
others.

\"Vidyasagar once asked me, \'Can it be true that God has endowed some
with greater power and some with less?\' I replied: \'If that were not
so, how is it that one man may be stronger than fifty? If that were not
the case, again, how is it that we have all come here to see you?\'

\"The soul through which God sports is endowed with His special power.
The landlord may reside in any part of his estate, but he is generally
to be found in a particular drawing-room. The devotee is God\'s
drawing-room. God loves to sport in the heart of His devotee. It is
there that His special power is manifest.

**Signs of a true devotee**

\"What is the sign of such a devotee? When you see a man doing great
works, you may know that God\'s special power is manifested through him.

**Identity of Brahman and Śakti**

\"The Primordial Power and the Supreme Brahman are identical. You can
never think of the one without the other. They are like the gem and its
brilliance. One cannot think of the brilliance without the gem, or of
the gem without its brilliance. Again, it is like the snake and its
wriggling motion. One cannot think of the wriggling motion without the
snake, or of the snake without its wriggling motion.

\"It is the Primordial Power that has become the universe and its living
beings and the twenty-four cosmic principles. It is a case of involution
and evolution.

**Master\'s love for pure-souled disciples**

\"Why do I feel so restless for Rākhāl , Narendra, and the other
youngsters? Hazra once asked me, \'When will you think of God if you are
always anxious about these boys?\' (Keshab and the others smile.) That
worried me greatly. I prayed to the Divine Mother: \'Mother, see what a
fix I am in! Hazra scolds me because I worry about these young men.\'
Afterwards I asked Bholanath about it. He said to me that such a state
of mind is described in the Mahabharata. How else will a man established
in samādhi occupy his mind in the phenomenal

world, after coming down from samādhi? That is why he seeks the company
of devotees endowed with sattva.

I gave a sigh of relief when Bholanath told me of the Mahabharata.

\"Hazra is not to blame. During the period of struggle one should follow
the method of discrimination-\'Not this, not this\'-and direct the whole
mind to God. But the state of perfection is quite different. After
reaching God one reaffirms what formerly one denied. To extract butter
you must separate it from the buttermilk. Then you discover that butter
and buttermilk are intrinsically related to one another. They belong to
the same stuff. The butter is not essentially different from the
buttermilk, nor the buttermilk essentially different from the butter.
After realizing God one knows definitely that it is He who has become
everything. In some objects He is manifested more clearly, and in others
less clearly.

\"When a flood comes from the ocean, all the land is deep under water.
Before the flood, the boat could have reached the ocean only by
following the winding course of the river. But after the flood, one can
row straight to the ocean. One need not take a roundabout course. After
the harvest has been reaped, one need not take the roundabout course
along the balk of the field. One can cross the field at any point.

\"After the realization of God, He is seen in all beings. But His
greater manifestation is in man. Again, among men, God manifests Himself
more clearly in those devotees who are sattvic, in those who have no
desire whatever to enjoy \'woman and gold\'. Where can a man of samādhi
rest his mind, after coming down from the plane of samādhi? That is why
he feels the need of seeking the company of pure-hearted devotees,
endowed with sattva and free from attachment to \'woman and gold\'. How
else could such a person occupy himself in the relative plane of
consciousness?

\"He who is Brahman is the *Ādyāśakti*, the Primal Energy. When inactive
He is called Brahman, the Purusha; He is called Śakti, or Prakriti, when
engaged in creation, preservation, and destruction. These are the two
aspects of Reality: Purusha and Prakriti. He who is the Purusha is also
Prakriti. Both are the embodiment of Bliss.

\"If you are aware of the Male Principle, you cannot ignore the Female
Principle: He who is aware of the father must also think of the mother.
( Keshab laughs ) He who knows darkness also knows light. He who knows
night also knows day. He who knows happiness also knows misery. You
understand this, don\'t you?\"

KESHAB: \"Yes, sir. I do.\"

MASTER: \"My Mother! Who is my Mother? Ah, She is the Mother of the
Universe. It is She who creates and preserves the world, who always
protects Her children, and who grants whatever they desire: dharma,
artha, kama, moksha. A true son cannot live away from his mother. The
Mother knows everything. The child only eats, drinks, and makes merry;
he doesn\'t worry himself about the things of the world.\"

KESHAB: \"Yes, sir. It is quite true.\"

While talking, Sri Ramakrishna regained the normal consciousness of the
world. With a smile on his face he conversed with Keshab. The roomful of
men watched them eagerly, and listened to their words. Everybody was
amazed to find that neither Keshab nor the Master inquired about each
other\'s health. They talked only of God.

**Meditating on God and not on His glories**

MASTER (to Keshab): \"Why do the members of the Brahmo Samaj dwell so
much on God\'s glories? Is there any great need of repeating such things
as \'O God, Thou hast created the moon, the sun, and the stars\'? Most
people are filled with admiration for the garden only. How few care to
see its owner! Who is greater, the garden or its owner?

\"After a few drinks at a tavern, do I care to Know how many gallons of
wine are stored there? One bottle is enough for me.

\"When I met Narendra, I never asked him \'Who is your father? How many
houses does he own?\'

\"Shall I tell you the truth? Man loves his own riches, and so he thinks
that God loves His, too. He thinks that God will be pleased if we
glorify His riches. Once Sambhu said to me, \'Please bless me, that I
may die leaving my riches at the Lotus Feet of God.\' I answered:
\'These are riches only to you. What riches can you offer God? To Him
these are mere dust and straw.\'

\"Once a thief broke into the temple of Vishnu and robbed the image of
its jewels. Mathur Babu and I went to the temple to see what was the
matter. Addressing the image, Mathur said bitterly: \'What a shame,
Lord! You are so worthless! The thief took all the ornaments from Your
body, and You couldn\'t do a thing about it.\' Thereupon I said to
Mathur: \'Shame on you! How improper your words are! To God, the jewels
you talk so much about are only lumps of clay. Lakshmi, the Goddess of
Fortune, is His Consort. Do you mean to say that He should spend
sleepless nights because a thief has taken your few rupees? You mustn\'t
say such things.\'

\"Can one ever bring God under control through wealth? He can be tamed
only through love. What does He want? Certainly not wealth! He wants
from His devotees love, devotion, feeling, discrimination, and
renunciation.

**Different classes worshippers**

\"One looks on God exactly according to one\'s own inner feeling. Take,
for instance, a devotee with an excess of tamas. He thinks that the
Divine Mother eats goat. So he slaughters one for Her. Again, the
devotee endowed with rajas cooks rice and various other dishes for the
Mother. But the sattvic devotee doesn\'t make any outer show of his
worship. People don\'t even know he is worshipping. If he has no
flowers, he worships God with mere Ganges water and the leaves of the
bel-tree. His food offering to the Deity consists of sweetened puffed
rice or a few candies. Occasionally he cooks a little rice pudding for
the Deity

\"There is also another class of devotees, those who are beyond the
three gunas. They have the nature of a child. Their worship consists in
chanting God\'s name-just His name.

**Meaning of Keshab\'s illness**

(To Keshab, with a smile) \"Why is it that you are ill? There is a
reason for it. Many spiritual feelings have passed through your body;
therefore it has fallen ill. At the time an emotion is aroused, one
understands very little about it. The blow that it delivers to the body
is felt only after a long while. I have seen big steamers going by on
the Ganges, at the time hardly noticing their passing. But oh, my! What
a terrific noise is heard after a while, when the waves splash against
the banks! Perhaps a piece of the bank breaks loose and falls into the
water.

\"An elephant entering a hut creates havoc within and ultimately shakes
it down. The elephant of divine emotion enters the hut of this body and
shatters it to pieces.

\"Do you know what actually happens? When a house is on fire, at first a
few things inside burn. Then comes the great commotion. Just so, the
fire of Knowledge at first destroys such enemies of spiritual life as
passion, anger, and so forth. Then comes the turn of ego. And lastly a
violent commotion is seen in the physical frame.

\"You may think that everything is going to be over. But God will not
release you as long as the slightest trace of your illness is left. You
simply cannot leave the hospital if your name is registered there. As
long as the illness is not perfectly cured, the doctor won\'t give you a
permit to go. Why did you register your name in the hospital at all?\"
(All laugh.)

**Master\'s own illness**

Keshab laughed again and again at the Master\'s allusion to the
hospital. Then Sri Ramakrishna spoke of his

own illness. (To Keshab) \"Hriday used to say, \'Never before have I
seen such ecstasy for God, and never before have I seen such illness.\'
I was then sriously ill with stubborn diarrhoea. It was as if millions
of ants were gnawing at my brain. But all the same, spiritual talk went
on day and night. Dr. Rāma of Natagore was called in to see me. He found
me discussing spiritual truth. \'What a madman!\' he said. \'Nothing is
left of him but a few bones, and still he is reasoning like that!\' \"

MASTER (to Keshab): \"All depends on God\'s will.

> *O Mother, all is done after Thine own sweet will;*
>
> *Thou art in truth self-willed, Redeemer of mankind!*
>
> *Thou workest Thine own work; men only call it theirs.*

\"In order to take full advantage of the dew, the gardener removes the
soil from the Basra rose down to the very root. The plant thrives better
on account of the moisture. Perhaps that is why you too are being shaken
to the very root. (Keshab and the Master laugh.) It may be that you will
do tremendous things when you come back.

\"Whenever I hear that you are ill I become extremely restless. After
hearing of your last illness I, used to weep to the Divine Mother in the
small hours of the morning. I prayed to Her, \'O Mother, if anything
happens to Keshab, with whom, then, shall I talk in Calcutta?\' Coming
to Calcutta, I offered fruits and sweets to the Divine Mother with a
prayer for your well-being.\"

The devotees were deeply touched to hear of Sri Ramakrishna\'s love for
Keshab and his longing for the Brahmo leader.

MASTER: \"But this time, to tell the truth, I didn\'t feel anxious to
that extent. Only for two or three days did I feel a little worried.\"

Keshab\'s venerable mother came to the east door of the room, the same
door through which Keshab had entered. Umanath said aloud to the Master,
\"Sir, here is mother saluting you.\"

Sri Ramakrishna smiled. Umanath said again, \"Mother asks you to bless
Keshab that he may be cured of his illness.\"

MASTER (to Keshab\'s mother): \"Please pray to the Divine Mother, who is
the Bestower of all bliss. She will take away your troubles.

(To keshab) \"Don\'t spend long hours in the inner apartments. You will
sink down and down in the company of women. You will feel better if you
hear only talk of God.\"

The Master uttered these words in a serious voice and then began to
laugh like a boy. He said to Keshab, \"Let me see your hand.\" He
weighed it playfully, like a child. At last he said: \"No, your hand is
light. Hypocrites have heavy hands.\"(All laugh.) .

Umanath again said to the Master from the door. \"Mother asks you to
bless Keshab.\"

MASTER (gravely): \"What can I do? God alone, blesses all. \'Thou
workest Thine, own work; men only call it theirs.\'

\"God laughs on two occasions. He laughs when two brothers divide land
between them. They put a string across the land and say to each other,
\'This side is mine, and that side is yours. God laughs and says to
Himself, \'Why, this whole universe is Mine; and about a little clod
they say, \"This side is mine, and that side is yours\"!\'

\"God laughs again when the physician says to the mother weeping
bitterly because of her child\'s desperate illness: \'Don\'t be afraid,
mother. I shall cure your child.\' The physician does not know that no
one can save the child if God wills that he should die.\" (All are
silent.)

Just then Keshab was seized with a fit of coughing, which lasted for a
long time. The sight of his suffering made everyone, sad. He became
exhausted and could stay no longer. He bowed low before the Master and
left the room, holding to the wall as before.

Some refreshments had been arranged for the Master. Keshab\'s eldest son
was seated near him. Amrita introduced the boy and requested Sri
Ramakrishna to bless him. The Master said, \"It is not given to me to
bless anyone.\" With a sweet smile he stroked the boy\'s body gently.

AMRITA (with a smile): \"All right, then do as you please.\"

MASTER (to the devotees): \" I cannot say such a thing as \'May you be
healed.\' I never ask the Divine Mother to give me the power of healing.
I pray to Her only for pure love.

**Master praises Keshab**

\"Is Keshab a small person? He is respected by all, seekers after wealth
as well as holy men. Once I visited Dayananda, who was then staying at a
garden house. I saw he was extremely anxious about Keshab\'s coming; he
went out every few minutes to see whether he had arrived. I learnt later
on that Keshab had made an appointment with him that day. Keshab, I
understood, had no faith in the sacrifices and the deities mentioned in
the Vedas. Referring to this, Dayananda said: \'Why, the Lord has
created so many things. Could He not make deities as well?\' \"

Continuing, the Master said: \"Keshab is free from the pride of a small
minded religious teacher. To many people he has said, \'If you have any
doubts, go there2 to have them solved.\' It is my way, too, to say:
\'What shall I do with people\'s respect? Let Keshab\'s virtues increase
a millionfold.\' Keshab is certainly a great man. Everyone respects him,
seekers after wealth as well as holy men.\" Thus did Sri Ramakrishna
praise Keshab before the latter\'s disciples.

After partaking of the refreshments the Master was ready to leave. The
Brahmo devotees accompanied him to the cab, which was standing in the
street. While coming down the stairs the Master noticed that there was
no light on the ground floor. He said to Amrita and Keshab\'s other
disciples: \"These places should be well lighted. A house without light
becomes stricken with poverty. Please see that it doesn\'t happen
again.\"

Then Sri Ramakrishna left for Dakshineswar with one or two devotees.

On his way to Dakshineswar from Keshab\'s cottage Sri Ramakrishna
stopped at Jaygopal Sen\'s house. It was about seven o\'clock in the
evening.

In the drawing-room, Jaygopal\'s relatives and neighbours had gathered.
Vaikuntha, Jaygopal\'s brother, said to the Master: \"Sir, we are
worldly people. Please give us some advice.\"

**Advice to the worldly-minded**

MASTER: \"Do your duty to the world after knowing God. With one hand
hold to the Lotus Feet of the Lord and with the other do your work.\"

VAIKUNTHA: \"Is the world unreal?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, it is unreal as long as one has not realized God. Through
ignorance man forgets God and speaks always of \'I\' and \'mine\'. He
sinks down and down, entangled in maya, deluded by \'woman and gold\'.
Maya robs him of his knowledge to such an extent that he cannot find the
way of escape, though such a way exists.

\"Listen to a song:

> *When such delusion veils the world, through Mahamaya\'s spell,*
>
> *That Brahma is bereft of sense*
>
> *And Vishnu loses consciousness,*
>
> *What hope is left for men? . .*

\"You all know from your experience how impermanent the world is. Look
at it this way. How many people have come into the world and again
passed away! People are born and they die. This moment the world is and
the next it is not. It is impermanent. Those you think to be your very
own will not exist for you when you close your eyes in death. Again, you
see people who have no immediate relatives, and yet for the sake of a
grandson they will not go to Benares to lead a holy life. \'Oh, what
will become of my Haru then?\' they argue.:

> *The narrow channel first is made, and there the trap is set;*
>
> *But open though the passage lies,*
>
> *The fish, once safely through the gate,*
>
> *Do not come out again.*
>
> *Yet even though a way leads forth,*
>
> *Encased within its own cocoon,*
>
> *The worm remains to die.*
>
> *This kind of world is illusory and impermanent.\"*

A NEIGHBOUR: \"Why, sir, should one hold to God with one hand and to the
world with the other? Why should one even stretch out one hand to hold
to the world, if it is impermanent?\"

MASTER: \"The world is not impermanent if one lives there after knowing
God. Listen to another song:

> *O mind, you do not know how to farm!*
>
> *Fallow lies the field of your life.*
>
> *If you had only worked it well,*
>
> *How rich a harvest you might reap!*
>
> *Hedge it about with Kāli\'s name*
>
> *If you would keep your harvest safe;*
>
> *This is the stoutest hedge of all,*
>
> *For Death himself cannot come near it. . . .*
>
> *\"Did you listen to the song?*
>
> *Hedge it about with Kāli\'s name*
>
> *If you would keep your harvest safe.*
>
> *Surrender yourself to God and you will achieve everything.*
>
> *This is the stoutest hedge of all,*
>
> *For Death himself cannot come near it.*

**Ideal householder\'s life**

\"Yes, it is a strong hedge indeed. If you but, realize God, you won\'t
see the world as unsubstantial. He who has realized God knows that God
Himself has become the world and all living beings. When you feed your
child, you should feel that you are feeding God. You should look on your
father and mother as veritable manifestations of God and the Divine
Mother, and serve them as such. If a man enters the world after
realizing God, he does not generally keep up physical relations with his
wife. Both of them are devotees; they love to talk only of God and pass
their time in spiritual conversation. They serve other devotees of God,
for they know that God alone has become all living beings; and, knowing
this, they devote their lives to the service of others.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"But, sir, such a husband and wife are not to be found
anywhere.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, they can be found, though they may be very rare. Worldly
people cannot recognize them. In order to lead such a life both husband
and wife must be spiritual. It is possible to lead such a life if both
of them have tasted the Bliss of God. God\'s special grace is necessary
to create such a couple; otherwise there will always be misunderstanding
between them. In that case the one has to leave the other. Life becomes
very miserable if husband and wife do not agree. The wife will say to
her husband day and night: \'Why did my father marry me to such a
person? I can\'t get enough to eat or to feed my children. I haven\'t
clothes enough to cover my body or to give to my children. I haven\'t
received a single piece of jewelry from you. How happy you have made me!
Ah! You keep your eyes closed and mutter the name of God! Now do give up
all these crazy ideas.\' \"

DEVOTEE: \"There are such obstacles, certainly. Besides, the children
may be disobedient. There is no end of difficulties. Now, sir, what is
the way?\"

**Solitude and holy company**

MASTER: \"It is extremely difficult to practise spiritual discipline and
at the same time lead a householder\'s life. There are many handicaps:
disease, grief, poverty, misunderstanding with one\'s wife, and
disobedient, stupid, and stubborn children. I don\'t have to give you a
list of them.

\"But still there is a way out. One should pray to God, going now and
then into solitude, and make efforts to realize Him.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"Must one leave home then?\"

MASTER: \"No, not altogether. Whenever you have leisure, go into
solitude for a day or two. At that time don\'t have any relations with
the outside world and don\'t hold any conversation with worldly people
on worldly affairs. You must live either in solitude or in the company
of holy men.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"How can one recognize a holy man?\"

MASTER: \"He who has surrendered his body, mind, and innermost self to
God is surely a holy man. He who has renounced \'woman and gold\' is
surely a holy man. He is a holy man who does not regard woman with the
eyes of a worldly person. He never forgets to look upon a woman as his
mother, and to offer her his worship if he happens to be near her. The
holy man constantly thinks of God and does not indulge in any talk
except about spiritual things. Furthermore, he serves all beings,
knowing that God resides in everybody\'s heart. These, in general, are
the signs of a holy man.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"Must one always live in solitude?\"

MASTER: \"Haven\'t you seen the trees on the foot-path along a street?
They are fenced around as long as they are very young; otherwise cattle
destroy them. But there is no longer any need of fences when their
trunks grow thick and strong. Then they won\'t break even if an elephant
is tied to them. Just so, there will be no need for you to worry and
fear if you make your mind as strong as a thick tree-trunk. First of all
try to acquire discrimination. Break the jack-fruit open only after you
have rubbed your hands with oil; then its sticky milk won\'t smear
them.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"What is discrimination?\"

MASTER: \"Discrimination is the reasoning by which one knows that God
alone is real and all else is unreal. Real means eternal, and unreal
means impermanent. He who has acquired discrimination knows that God is
the only Substance and all else is non-existent. With the awakening of
this spirit of discrimination a man wants to know God. On the contrary,
if a man loves the unreal-such things as creature comforts, name, fame,
and wealth, then he doesn\'t want to know God, who is of the very nature
of Reality. Through discrimination

between the Real and the unreal one seeks to know God.

\"Listen to a song:

> *Come, let us go for a walk, O mind, to Kāli, the Wish-fulfilling
> Tree, And there beneath It gather the four fruits of life. Of your two
> wives, Dispassion and Worldliness, Bring along Dispassion only, on
> your way to the Tree, And ask her son Discrimination about the Truth.
> . . .*

\"By turning the mind within oneself one acquires discrimination, and
through discrimination one thinks of Truth. Then the mind feels the
desire to go for a walk to Kāli, the Wish-fulfilling Tree. Reaching that
Tree, that is to say, going near to God, you can without any effort
gather four fruits, namely, dharma, artha, kama, and moksha. Yes, after
realizing God, one can also get, if one so desires, dharma, artha, and
kama, which are necessary for leading the worldly life.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"Then why should one call the world maya?\"

**God and the world**

MASTER: \"As long as one has not realized God, one should renounce the
world, following the process of \'Neti, neti.\' But he who has attained
God knows that it is God who has become all this. Then he sees that God,
maya, living beings, and the universe form one whole. God includes the
universe and its living beings. Suppose you have separated the shell,
flesh, and seeds of a bel-fruit and someone asks you the weight of the
fruit. Will you leave aside the shell and the seeds, and weigh only the
flesh? Not at all. To know the real weight of the fruit, you must weigh
the whole of it-the shell, the flesh, and the seeds. Only then can you
tell its real weight. The shell may be likened to the universe, and the
seeds to living beings. While one is engaged in discrimination one says
to oneself that the universe and the living beings are non-Self and
unsubstantial. At that time one thinks of the flesh alone as the
substance, and the shell and seeds as unsubstantial. But after
discrimination is over, one feels that all three parts of the fruit
together form a unity. Then one further realizes that the stuff that has
produced the flesh of the fruit has also produced the shell and seeds.
To know the real nature of the bel-fruit one must know all three.

\"It is the process of evolution and involution. The world, after its
dissolution, remains involved in God; and God, at the time of creation,
evolves as the world. Butter goes with buttermilk, and buttermilk goes
with butter. If there is a thing called buttermilk, then butter also
exists; and if there is a thing called butter, then buttermilk also
exists. If the Self exists, then the non-Self must also exist.

\"The phenomenal world belongs to that very Reality to which the
Absolute belongs; again, the Absolute belongs to that very Reality to
which the phenomenal world belongs. He who is realized as God has also
become the universe and its living beings. One who knows the Truth knows
that it is He alone who has become father and mother, child and
neighbour, man and animal, good and bad, holy and unholy, and so
forth.\"

**Virtue and vice**

NEIGHBOUR: \"Then is there no virtue and no sin?\"

MASTER: \"They both exist and do not exist. If God keeps the ego in a
man, then He keeps in him the sense of differentiation and also the
sense of virtue and sin. But in a rare few He completely effaces the ego
and these go beyond virtue and sin, good and bad. As long as a man has
not realized God, he retains the sense of differentiation and the
knowledge of good and bad. You may say: \'Virtue and sin are the same to
me. I am doing only as God bids me.\' But you know in your heart of
hearts that those are mere words. No sooner do you commit an evil deed
than you feel a palpitation in your heart. Even after God has been
realized, He keeps in the mind of the devotee, if He so desires, the
feeling of the \'servant ego\'. In that state the devotee says, \'O God,
Thou art the Master and I am Thy servant.\' Such a devotee enjoys only
spiritual talk and spiritual deeds. He does not enjoy the company of
ungodly people. He does not care for any work that is not of a holy

nature. So you see that God keeps the sense of differentiation even in
such a devotee.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"You ask us, sir, to live in the world after knowing God.
Can God really be known?\"

MASTER: \"God cannot be known by the sense-organs or by this mind; but
He can be known by the pure mind, the mind that is free from worldiy
desires.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"Who can know God?\"

MASTER: \"Right. Who can really know Him? But as for us, it is enough to
know as much of Him as we need.

What need have I of a whole well of water? One jar is more than enough
for me. An ant went to a sugar hill.

Did it need the entire hill? A grain or two of sugar was more than
enough.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"Sir, we are like typhoid patients. How can we be satisfied
with one jar of water? We feel like knowing, the whole of God.\"

MASTER: \"That\'s true. But there is also medicine for typhoid.\"

NEIGHBOUR: \"What is that medicine, sir?\"

MASTER: \"The company of holy men, repeating the name of God and singing
His glories, and unceasing

prayer. I prayed to the Divine Mother: \'Mother, I don\'t seek
knowledge. Here, take Thy knowledge, take Thy ignorance. Give me only
pure love for Thy Lotus Feet.\' I didn\'t ask for anything else.

\"As is the disease, so must the remedy be. The Lord says in the Gitā:
\'O Arjuna, take refuge in Me. I shall deliver you from all sins.\' Take
shelter at His feet: He will give you right understanding. He will take
entire responsibility for you. Then you will get rid of the typhoid. Can
one ever know God with such a mind as this? Can one pour four seers of
milk into a one-seer pot? Can we ever know God unless He lets us know
Him? Therefore I say, take shelter in God. Let Him do whatever He likes.
He is self-willed. What power is there in a man?\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 16**

WITH THE DEVOTEES AT DAKSHINESWAR (II)

> Sunday, December 9, 1883

**Chaitanya\'s exalted state**

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was seated on the small couch in his room with Adhar,
Manomohan, Rākhāl , M., Harish, and other devotees. It was about two o\'
clock in the afternoon. The Master was describing to them the exalted
state of Sri Chaitanya.

MASTER: \"Chaitanya experienced three states of mind. First, the
conscious state, when his mind dwelt on the gross and the subtle.
Second, the semi-conscious state, when his mind entered the causal body
and was absorbed in the bliss of divine intoxication. Third, the inmost
state, when his mind was merged in the Great Cause.

This agrees very well with the five koshas, or \'sheaths\', described in
the Vedānta. The gross body corresponds to the annamayakosha and the
pranamayakosha, the subtle body to the manomayakosha and the
vijnanamayakosha, and the causal body to the Ānandamayakosha. The
Mahakarana, the Great Cause, is beyond the five sheaths. When
Chaitanya\'s mind merged in That, he would go into samādhi. This is
called the nirvikalpa or jada samādhi.

\"While conscious of the outer world, Chaitanya sang the name of God;
while in the state of partial consciousness, he danced with the
devotees; and while in the inmost state of consciousness, he remained
absorbed in samādhi.\"

M. (to himself): \"Is the Master hinting at the different states of his
own mind? There is much similarity between Chaitanya and the Master.\"

MASTER: \"Chaitanya was Divine Love incarnate. He came down to earth to
teach people how to love God. One achieves everything when one loves
God. There is no need of hathayoga.\"

**Practice of Hathayoga**

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, what is hathayoga like?\"

MASTER: \"A man practising hathayoga dwells a great deal on his body. He
washes his intestines by means of a bamboo tube through his anus. He
draws ghee and milk through his sexual organ. He learns how to
manipulate his tongue by performing exercises. He sits in a fixed
posture and bow and then levitates. All these are actions of prana. A
magician was performing his feats when his tongue turned up and clove to
the roof of his mouth. Immediately his body became motionless. People
thought he was dead. He was buried and remained many years in the grave.
After a long time the grave somehow broke open. Suddenly the man
regained consciousness of the world and cried out, \'Come delusion! Come
confusion!\' (All laugh.) All these are actions of prana.

\"The Vedantists do not accept hathayoga. There is also rajayoga.
Rajayoga describes how to achieve union with God through the mind by
means of discrimination and bhakti. This yoga is good. Hathayoga is not
good. The life of a man in the Kaliyuga is dependent on food.\"

Sri Ramakrishna was standing in the road by the side of the nahabat. He
was on his way to his room, having come from the pine-grove. He saw M.
seated on the verandah of the nahabat, behind the fence, absorbed in
meditation.

MASTER: \"Hello! You are here? You will get results very soon. If you
practise a little, then someone will come

forward to help you.\"

M. looked up at the Master, startled; he remained sitting on the floor.

MASTER: \"The time is ripe for you. The mother bird does not break the
shell of the egg until the right time arrives. What I told you is indeed
your Ideal.\"

Sri Ramakrishna again mentioned to M. his spiritual Ideal.

MASTER: \"It is not necessary for all to practise great austerity. But I
went through great suffering. I used to lie on the ground with my head
resting on a mound for a pillow. I hardly noticed the passing of the
days. I only called on God and wept, \'O Mother! O Mother!\'\"

M. had been visiting Sri Ramakrishna for the past two years. Since he
had been educated along English lines, he had acquired a fondness for
Western philosophy and science, and had liked to hear Keshab and other
scholars lecture. Sri Ramakrishna would address him now and then as the
\"English-man\". Since coming to Sri Ramakrishna, M. had lost all relish
for lectures and for books written by English scholars. The only thing
that appealed to him now was to see the Master day and night, and hear
the words that fell from his blessed lips. M. constantly dwelt on
certain of Sri Ramakrishna\'s sayings. The Master had said, \"One can
certainly see God through the practice of spiritual discipline\", and
again, \"The vision of God is the only goal of human life.\"

MASTER (to M.): \"If you practise only a little, someone will come
forward to tell you the right path. Observe the ekadasi.

**Master\'s intimate relationship with disciples**

\"You are my very own, my relative; otherwise, why should you come here
so frequently? While listening to the kirtan, I had a vision of Rākhāl
in the midst of Sri Krishna\'s companions in Vrindāvan. Narendra belongs
to a very high level. Hirananda too; how childlike his nature is! What
sweet disposition he has! I want to see him too.

\"Once I saw the companions of Chaitanya, not in a trance but with these
very eyes. Formerly I was in such an exalted state of mind that I could
see all these things with my naked eyes; but now I see them in samādhi.
I saw the companions of Chaitanya with these naked eyes. I think I saw
you there, and Balarām too, You must have noticed that when I see
certain people I jump up with a start. Do you know why? A man feels that
way when he sees his own people after a long time.

\"I used to pray to the Mother, crying: \'Mother, if I do not find the
devotees I\'ll surely die. Please bring them to me immediately.\' In
those days whatever desire arose in my mind would come to pass. I
planted a tulsi-grove in the Panchavati in order to practise japa and
meditation. I wanted very much to fence it around with bamboo sticks.
Soon afterwards a bundle of bamboo sticks and some string were carried
by the flood-tide of the Ganges right in front of the Panchavati. A
temple servant noticed them and joyfully told me.

\"In that state of divine exaltation I could no longer perform the
formal worship. \'Mother,\' I said, \'who will look after me? I haven\'t
the power to take care of myself. I want to listen only to talk about
Thee. I want to feed Thy devotees. I want to give a little help to those
whom I chance to meet. How will all that be possible, Mother? Give me a
rich man to stand by me.\' That is why Mathur Babu did so much to serve
me.

\"I said further, \'Certainly I shall not have any children, Mother. But
it is my desire that a boy with sincere love for God should always
remain with me. Give me such a boy.\' That is the reason Rākhāl came
here. Those whom I think of as my own are part and parcel of me.\"

The Master started again for the Panchavati accompanied by M. No one
else was with them. Sri Ramakrishna with a smile narrated to him various
incidents of the past years of his life.

MASTER: \"You see, one day I. saw a strange figure covering the whole
space from the Kāli temple to the Panchavati. Do you believe this?\"

M. remained silent with wonder. He plucked one or two leaves from a
branch in the Panchavati and put them in his pocket.

MASTER: \"See there-that branch has been broken. I used to sit under
it.\"

23. \"I took a young twig from that tree-I have it at home.\" MASTER
    (with a smile): \"Why?\"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
23. \"I feel happy when I look at it. After all this is over, this place
    will be considered very holy.\" MASTER (smiling): \"What kind of
    holy place? Like Panihati?\"

Almost every year, for some time past, the Master had been attending the
religious festival at Panihati.

It was evening. Sri Ramakrishna was sitting on the small couch in his
room, absorbed in meditation on the Divine Mother. The evening worship
in the temples began, with the music of gong and conch-shell. M. was
going to spend the night with the Master.

Ater a time Sri Ramakrishna asked M. to read from the Bhaktamala, a book
about the Vaishnava saints.

**Story of a Vaishnava devotee**

M. read: "There was a king named Jayamal who loved Krishna with all his
heart. He followed with unfailing devotion all the rites and ceremonies
associated with the adoration of Krishna, whom he worshipped under the
name of Syamalasundara. Completely satisfied with his own Ideal Deity,
he never directed his attention to any other god or goddess. One of the
inflexible rules of his devotions was to worship the Deity daily till
almost midday. He would never deviate from this practice, even at the
risk of his wealth or his kingdom. Learning this secret, an enemy king
invaded the kingdom during the morning hours. Jayamal\'s soldiers could
not fight without his command; so they watched the invasion silently.
Slowly the enemy surrounded the moat of the capital; yet Jayamal did not
come out of his shrine room. His mother came to him and wept bitterly,
trying to persuade the king to fight. He said to her calmly: \"Why are
you worried? Syamalasundara gave me this kingdom. What can I do if He
has decided to take it away? On the other hand, none will be able to do
me harm if He protects me. Our own efforts are vain!*\"*

And actually, in the mean time, Syamalasundara, the Deity Himself, had
taken the king\'s horse from the stable and had ridden fully armed to
the field. Alone He faced the hostile king and alone destroyed his army.
Having crushed the enemy forces, the Deity returned to the temple and
fastened the horse near by.

Jayamal, on completing his worship, came out and discovered the horse
there, panting and covered with sweat. \"Who has been riding my horse?\"
he demanded. \"Who brought it to the temple?\" The officers declared
they knew nothing about it. In a pensive mood the king proceeded to the
battle-field with his army and there found the enemy, with the exception
of their leader, lying dead. He was staring uncomprehendingly at the
scene, when the enemy king approached, worshipped him, and said:
\"Please permit me to tell you something. How could I fight? You have a
warrior who could conquer the entire world. I do not want your wealth or
your kingdom; indeed, I will gladly give you my own, if you will tell me
about that Blue Warrior, your friend. No sooner did I turn my eyes on
him than he cast a spell on my heart and soul.\"

Jayamal then realized it had been none other than Syamalasundara that
had appeared on the battle-field. The enemy king understood too. He
worshipped Jayamal and through his blessings received Krishna\'s grace.

MASTER: \"Do you believe all that? Do you believe Krishna rode on that
horse and killed Jayamal\'s enemies?\"

1.  \"I believe that Jayamal, Krishna\'s devotee, prayed to Him with a
    yearning heart. But I don\'t know whether the enemy really saw Him
    coming to the battle-field on a horse. Krishna might have come there
    riding the horse, but I do not know whether they really saw Him.\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"The book contains nice stories about devotees.
But it is one-sided. Also, it abuses those who differ with its views.\"

The following morning the Master and M. were talking in the garden.

M: \"Then I shall stay here.\"

MASTER: \"Well, you all come here so often. What does it mean? People
visit a holyman once at the most. But you all come here so often. What
is the significance of that?\"

M. remained silent. The Master himself gave the reply.

MASTER: \"Could you come here unless you belonged to my inner circle?
That means you all are my own relatives, my own people-like father and
son, brother and sister.

\"I do not tell you everything. If I did, would you come here any more?

\"Once Sukadeva went to Janaka to be instructed in the Knowledge of
Brahman; Janaka said, \'First give me my fee.\' \'But\', said Sukadeva,
\'why should I give you the fee before receiving the instruction?\'
Janaka laughed and said: \'Will you be conscious of guru and disciple
after attaining Brahmajnana? That is why I asked you to give me the fee
first.\' \"

It was night. The moon rose, flooding all the quarters with its silvery
light. M. was walking alone in the garden of the temple. On one side of
the path stood the Panchavati, the bakul-grove, the nahabat, and the
Master\'s room, and on the other side flowed the Ganges, reflecting
millions of broken moons on its rippling surface.

M. said to himself: \"Can one really see God? The Master says it is
possible. He says that, if one makes a little effort, then someone comes
forward and shows the way. Well, I am married. I have children. Can one
realize God in spite of all that?\"

M. reflected awhile and continued his soliloquy: \"Surely one can.
Otherwise, why should the Master say so?

Why shouldn\'t it be possible through the grace of God?

\"Here is the world around me-the sun, moon, stars, living beings, and
the twenty-four cosmic principles. How did they come into existence? Who
is their Creator? What am I to Him? Life is indeed vain without this
knowledge.

\"Sri Ramakrishna is certainly the best of men. In all my life I have
not seen another great soul like him. He must have seen God. Otherwise,
how could he talk with God day and night, addressing Him so intimately
as \'Mother\'? Otherwise, how could he love God so intimately? Such is
his love for God that he forgets the outer world. He goes into samādhi
and remains like a lifeless thing. Again, in the ecstasy of that love,
he laughs and cries and dances and sings.\"

**Friday, December 14, 1883**

At nine o\'clock in the morning Sri Ramakrishna was standing on the
southeast verandah near the door of his room, with Ramlal by his side.
Rākhāl and Lātu were moving about. M. arrived and prostrated himself
before the Master. Sri Ramakrishna said to him affectionately: \"You
have come. That\'s very good. Today is an auspicious day.\"

It was the last day of the Bengali month and the day of the full moon.
M. was going to spend a few days with

the Master practising spiritual discipline. The Master had said to him,
\"If an aspirant practises a little spiritual discipline, then someone
comes forward to help him.\"

The Master had said to M: \"You should not eat every day at the
guesthouse of the Kāli temple. The guest-house is intended to supply
free food to monks and the destitute. Bring your own cook with you.\" M.
had accordingly done so. The Master arranged a place for the man to cook
and he asked Ramlal to speak to the milkman about milk.

A little later Ramlal began to read from the Adhyātma Rāmāyana. The
Master and M. listened while he read:

Rāma had married Sita after breaking the great bow of Śiva. On the way
to Ayhodhya with His bride, Rāma was confronted by the warrior sage
Parasurama, who was about to make trouble for Him. Parasurama threw a
bow at Rāma and challenged Him to string it. Dasaratha, Rāma\'s father,
was seized with fear. With a smile, Rāma took the bow in His left hand
and strung it. Then twanging the bow-string, He fixed an arrow and asked
Parasurama where to shoot it. That curbed the pride of the warrior sage.
Prostrating himself before Rāma, Parasurama worshipped Him as the
Supreme Brahman.

As Sri Ramakrishna listened to Parasurama\'s hymn, he went into a
spiritual mood and now and then chanted the name of Rāma in his
melodious voice.

Then the Master asked Ramlal to read about Guhaka. Ramlal read:

Guhaka, the pariah, was chief of the untouchables and an intimate friend
of Rāma. When Rāma, Sita, and Lakshmana were starting into the forest to
redeem Dasaratha\'s pledge, Guhaka ferried them across the river. Rāma
embraced Guhaka tenderly and told him He was going to spend fourteen
years in exile, wearing the bark of trees and eating herbs, fruits, and
roots that grew in the woods. He promised to visit Guhaka again on His
way back to Ayhodhya after the period of exile was over. The pariah king
waited patiently. But when the fourteenth year had run out and Rāma had
not returned, Guhaka lighted a funeral pyre. He was on the point of
entering it when Hanuman arrived as Rāma\'s messenger. In a celestial
chariot Rāma and Sita soon appeared, and Guhaka\'s joy was unbounded.

After the midday meal Sri Ramakrishna lay down on his bed to rest. M.
was seated on the floor. Presently Dr. Shyama and a few devotees
arrived. The Master sat up on the bed and began to converse with them.

**Work and worship**

MASTER: \"It is by no means necessary for a man always to be engaged in
his duties. Actions drop away when one realizes, God, as the flower
drops of itself when the fruit appears.

\"He who has realized God no longer performs religious duties such as
the sandhya. In his case the sandhya merges in the Gayatri. When that
happens, it is enough for a person to repeat just the Gayatri mantra.
Then the Gayatri merges in Om. After that one no longer chants even the
Gayatri; it is enough then to chant simply Om. How long should a man
practise such devotions as the sandhya? As long as he does not feel a
thrill in his body and shed tears of joy while repeating the name of
Rāma or of Hari. People worship God to win money or a lawsuit. That is
not good.\"

A DEVOTEE: \"We find that everyone strives after money. Even Keshab Sen
married his daughter to a prince.\"

MASTER: \"Keshab\'s case is quite different. God provides everything for
a genuine devotee, even without his making any effort. The son of a real
king gets his monthly allowance. I am not talking of lawyers and men of
that sort, who go through suffering in order to earn money, and who
become slaves of others to that end. I am speaking of a real prince. A
true devotee has no desire. He does not care for money. Money comes to
him of itself. The Gitā describes such a devotee as \'content with what
comes to him without effort\'. A good brahmin, without any personal
motive, can accept food even from the house of an untouchable. He does
not desire it; it comes of its own accord.\"

**How to live in the world**

A DEVOTEE: \"Sir, how should one live in the world?\"

MASTER: \"Live in the world as the mud fish lives in the mud. One
develops love of God by going away from the world into solitude, now and
then, and meditating on God. After that one can live in the world
unattached. The mud is there, and the fish has to live in it, but its
body is not stained by the mud. Such a man can lead the life of a
householder in a spirit of detachment\"

The Master noticed that M. was listening to his words with great
attention.

MASTER (looking at M.): \"One can realize God if one feels intense
dispassion for worldly things. A man with such dispassion feels that the
world is like a forest on fire. He regards his wife and children as a
deep well. If he really feels that kind of dispassion, he renounces home
and family. It is not enough for him to live in the world in a spirit of
detachment.

1.  \'Woman and gold\' alone is maya. If maya is once recognized, it
    feels ashamed of itself and takes to flight. A man put on a tiger
    skin and tried to frighten another man. But the latter said: \'Ah! I
    have recognized you! You are our Hare.\' At that the man dressed in
    the skin went away smiling to frighten someone else.

**Women as embodiments of the Divine Mother**

\"All women are the embodiments of Śakti. It is the Primal Power that
has become women and appears to us in the form of women. It is said in
the Adhyātma Rāmāyana that Nārada and others praised Rāma, saying: \'O
Rāma, Thou alone art all that we see as male, and Sita, all that we see
as female. Thou art Indra, and Sita is Indrani; Thou art Śiva and Sita
is Sivani; Thou art man, and Sita is woman. What more need I say? Thou
alone dost exist wherever there is a male, and Sita wherever there is a
female.\'

(To the devotees) \"One cannot renounce by the mere wish. There are
prarabdha karma-inherited tendencies-and the like. Once a yogi said to a
king, \'Live with me in the forest and think of God.\' The king replied:
\'That I cannot very well do. I could live with you, but I still have
the desire for enjoyment. If I live in this forest, perhaps I shall
create a kingdom even here. I still have desires.\'

\"Natabar Panja used to look after his cows in this garden during his
boyhood. He had many desires. Hence he has established a castor-oil
factory and earned a great deal of money. He has a prosperous castor-oil
business at Alambazar.

\"There is one sect that prescribes spiritual discipline in company with
women. I was once taken to the women belonging to the Kartabhaja sect.
They all sat around me. I addressed them as \'mother\'. At that they
whispered among themselves: \'He is still a pravartaka. He doesn\'t know
the way.\' According to that sect the pravartaka is the beginner. Then
comes the sadhaka, the struggling aspirant, and last of all the siddha
of the siddha, the supremely perfect. A woman walked over to
Vaishnavcharan and sat near him. Asked about it, he answered, \'She
feels just like a young girl.\' One quickly strays from the religious
path by looking on woman as wife: But to regard her as mother is a pure
attitude.\"

Some of the devotees took leave of the Master, saying that they were
going to visit the temple of Kāli and several of the other temples.

M. went walking alone in the Panchavati and other places in the temple
garden. He thought about the Master\'s assurance that God can be easily
realized, and about his exhortation to lead a life of intense
renunciation, and his saying that maya, when recognized, takes to
flight.

**Image worship**

At half past three in the afternoon M. again entered the Master\'s room
and sat on the floor. A teacher from the Broughton Institution had come
with several students to pay a visit to Sri Ramakrishna. They were

conversing together. Now and then the teacher asked questions. The
conversation was about the worship of images.

MASTER (to the teacher): \"What is wrong with image worship? The Vedānta
says that Brahman manifests Itself where there is \'Existence, Light,
and Love\'. Therefore nothing exists but Brahman.

\"How long do small girls play with their dolls? As long as they are not
married and do not live with their husbands. After marriage they put the
dolls away in a box. What further need is there of worshipping the image
after the vision of God?\"

**God-vision through yearning**

The Master glanced at M. and said: \"One attains God when one feels
yearning for Him. An intense restlessness is needed. Through it the
whole mind goes to God.

\"A man had a daughter who became a widow when she was very young. She
had never known her husband: She noticed the husbands of other girls and
said one day to her father, \'Where is my husband?\' The father replied:
\'Govinda is your husband. He will come to you if you call Him.\' At
these words the girl went to her room, closed the door, and cried to
Govinda, saying: \'O Govinda, corne to me! Show Yourself to me! Why
don\'t You come?\' God could not resist the girl\'s piteous cry and
appeared before her.

\"One must have childlike faith-and the intense yearning that a child
feels to see its mother. That yearning is like the red sky in the east
at dawn. After such a sky the sun must rise. Immediately after that
yearning one sees God.

\"Let me tell you the story of a boy named Jatila. He used to walk to
school through the woods, and the journey frightened him; One day he
told his mother of his fear. She replied: \'Why should you be afraid?
Call Madhusudana.\' \'Mother,\' asked the boy, \'who is Madhusudana?\'
The mother said, \'He is your Elder Brother.\' One day after this, when
the boy again felt afraid in the woods, he cried out, \'O Brother
Madhusudana!\' But there was no response. He began to weep aloud:
\'Where are You, Brother Madhusudana? Come to me. I am afraid.\' Then
God could no longer stay away. He appeared before the boy and said:
\'Here I am. Why are you frightened?\' And so, saying He took the boy
out of the woods and showed him the way to school. When He took leave of
the boy, God said: \'I will come whenever you call Me. Do not be
afraid.\' One must have this faith of a child, this yearning.

\"A brahmin used to worship his Family Deity daily with food offerings.
One day he had to go away on business. As he was about to leave the
house, he said to his young son: \'Give the offering to the Deity today.
See that God is fed.\' The boy offered food in the shrine, but the image
remained silent on the altar. It would neither talk nor eat. The boy
waited a long time, but still the image did not move. But the boy firmly
believed that God would come down from His throne, sit on the floor, and
partake of the food. Again and again he prayed to the Deity, saying: \'O
Lord, come down and eat the food. It is already very late. I cannot sit
here any longer.\' But the image did not utter a word. The boy burst
into tears and cried: \'O Lord, my father asked me to feed You. Why
won\'t You come down? Why won\'t You eat from my hands?\' The boy wept
for some time with a longing soul. At last the Deity, smiling, came down
from the altar and sat before the meal and ate it. After feeding the
Deity, the boy came out of the shrine room. His relatives said: \'The
worship is over. Now bring away the offering.\' \'Yes,\' said the boy,
\'the worship is over. But God has eaten everything.\' \'How is that?\'
asked the relatives. The boy replied innocently, \'Why, God has eaten
the food.\' They entered the shrine and were speechless with wonder to
see that the Deity had really eaten every bit of the offering.\"

Late in the afternoon Sri Ramakrishna was talking to M. They were
standing on the south side of the nahabat.

Since it was winter the Master was wrapped in his woolen shawl.

MASTER: \"Where will you sleep? In the hut in the Panchavati?\"

M: \"Won\'t they let me have the room on the upper floor of the
nahabat?\"

M. selected the nahabat because he had a poetic temperament. From there
he could see the sky, the Ganges, the moonlight, and the flowers in the
garden.

MASTER: \"Oh, they\'ll let you have it. But I suggested the Panchavati
because so much contemplation and meditation have been practised there
and the name of God has been chanted there so often.\"

It was evening. Incense was burning in the Master\'s room. He was
sitting on the small couch, absorbed in meditation. M. was sitting on
the floor with Rākhāl , Lātu, and Ramlal.

**Singing of devotional songs**

The Master said to M., \"The sum and substance of the whole thing is to
cultivate devotion for God and love Him.\" At Sri Ramakrishna\'s request
Ramlal sang a few songs, the Master himself singing the first line of
each.

Ramlal sang:

> *Oh, what a vision I have beheld in Keshab Bharati\'s hut!*
>
> *Gora, in all his matchless grace,*
>
> *Shedding tears in a thousand streams!*
>
> *Like a mad elephant*
>
> *He dances in ecstasy and sings,*
>
> *Drunk with an overwhelming love. . . .*
>
> *Then he sang:*
>
> *Though I am never loath to grant salvation,*
>
> *I hesitate indeed to grant pure love.*
>
> *Whoever wins pure love surpasses all;*
>
> *He is adored by men;*
>
> *He triumphs over the three worlds. . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna said to Ramlal, *"*Sing that one-*\'Gaur and Nitai, ye
blessed brothers\'*.*\"* Ramlal began the song and the Master joined
him:

> *Gaur and Nitai, ye blessed brothers!*
>
> *I have heard how kind you are,*
>
> *And therefore I have come to you.*
>
> *When I visited Benares,*
>
> *Śiva, Lord of Kasi, told me*
>
> *Of the Parabrahman\'s birth,*
>
> *As man, in Mother Sachi\'s home.*
>
> *O Brahman, Thee I recognize!*
>
> *Many a sādhu have I seen,*
>
> *But never one so kind as you.*
>
> *Once at Braja you were born*
>
> *As Kanai and Balai, His brother;*
>
> *Now, once more, in Nadia,*
>
> *As Gaur and Nitai do you appear,*
>
> *Hiding the shapes that then you wore.*
>
> *In Braja\'s pastures running freely,*
>
> *Once you frolicked; now, for play,*
>
> *You roll on the ground in Nadia,*
>
> *Chanting aloud Lord Hari\'s name.*
>
> *Laughing, shouting, once you played*
>
> *At Braja with your cowherd friends;*
>
> *And now you chant Lord Hari\'s name.*
>
> *O Gaur, how cleverly you hide*
>
> *The dark-blue form you wore at Braja!*
>
> *But your slanting eyes betray you.*
>
> *Through the blessing of your name*
>
> *The sinner is set free, they say;*
>
> *And so my soul is filled with hope.*
>
> *Now with eager heart I hasten*
>
> *To your feet: Lord! I implore you,*
>
> *Keep me safe within their shadow.*
>
> *You redeemed Jagai and Madhai,*
>
> *Wretched sinners though they were;*
>
> *I pray you, do the same for me.*
>
> *I have heard that you embrace*
>
> *All men as brothers, even the outcaste,*
>
> *Whispering in the ears of all*
>
> *Lord Hari\'s life-renewing name.*

Late at night M. sat alone in the nahabat. The sky, the river, the
garden, the steeples of the temples; the trees, and the Panchavati were
flooded with moonlight. Deep silence reigned everywhere, broken only by
the melodious murmuring of the Ganges. M. was meditating on Sri
Ramakrishna.

At three o\'clock in the morning M. left his seat. He proceeded toward
the Panchavati as Sri Ramakrishna. had suggested. He did not care for
the nahabat any more and resolved to stay in the hut in the Panchavati.

Suddenly he heard a distant sound, as if someone were wailing piteously,
\"Oh, where art Thou, Brother

Madhusudana?\" The light of the full moon streamed through the thick
foliage of the Panchavati, and as he

proceeded he saw at a distance one of the Master\'s disciples sitting
alone in the grove, crying helplessly, \"Oh,

where art Thou, Brother Madhusudana?\"

Silently M. watched him.

**Saturday, December 15, 1883**

**Story of Prahlada**

M. had been staying at Dakshineswar with Sri Ramakrishna. The Master was
sitting in his room, listening to the life of Prahlada, which Ramlal was
reading from the Bhaktamala. M. was sitting on the floor. Rākhāl , Lātu,
and Harish were also in the room, and Hazra was on the verandah. While
listening to the story of Prahlada\'s love for God, Sri Ramakrishna went
into an ecstatic mood.

Hiranyakasipu, the king of the demons and father of Prahlada, had put
his son to endless torture to divert the boy\'s mind from the love of
God. But through divine grace all the king\'s attempts to kill Prahlada
were ineffective. At last God appeared, assuming the form of Nrisimha,
the Man-lion, and killed Hiranyakasipu. The gods were frightened at the
rage and roaring of the Man-lion and thought that the destruction of the
world was imminent.

They sent Prahlada to pacify the Deity. The boy sang a hymn to Him in
words of love, and the Man-lion, moved by affection, licked Prahlada\'s
body.

Still in an ecstatic mood, the Master said, \"Ah! Ah! What love for the
devotee!\" The Master went into deep samādhi. He sat there motionless. A
tear-drop could be seen at the corner of each of his eyes.

**Master admonishes M.**

The Master came down to the plane of the sense world and spoke to M.,
expressing his abhorrence for those

who, while practising spiritual discipline, enjoyed sex-life.

MASTER: \"Aren\'t you ashamed of yourself? You have children, and still
you enjoy intercourse with your wife. Don\'t you hate yourself for thus
leading an animal life? Don\'t you hate yourself for dallying with a
body which contains only blood, phlegm, filth, and excreta? He who
contemplates the Lotus Feet of God looks on even the most beautiful
woman as mere ash from the cremation ground. To enjoy a body which will
not last and which consists of such impure ingredients as intestines,
bile, flesh, and bone! Aren\'t you ashamed of yourself?\"

M. sat there silently, hanging his head in shame.

MASTER: \"A man who has tasted even a drop of God\'s ecstatic love looks
on \'woman and gold\' as most insignificant. He who has tasted syrup
made from sugar candy regards a drink made from treacle as a mere
trifle. One gradually obtains that love for God if one but prays to Him
with a yearning heart and always chants His name and glories.\"

The Master was in an ecstasy of love. He began to dance about the room
and sing:

> *Who is singing Hari\'s name upon the sacred Ganges\' bank?*
>
> *Is it Nitai that has come, the giver of heavenly love? .*

It was ten o\'clock in the morning. Ramlal had finished the daily
worship in the Kāli temple. The Master went to the temple accompanied by
M. Entering the shrine, the Master sat before the image. He offered a
flower or two at the feet of the Divine Mother. Then he put a flower on
his own head and began to meditate. He sang a song to the Divine Mother:

> *Thy name, I have heard, O Consort of Śiva, is the destroyer of our
> fear,*
>
> *And so on Thee I cast my burden: Save me! Save me, O kindly Mother!*

Sri Ramakrishna returned from the Kāli temple and sat on the southeast
verandah of his room. He ate some refreshments which had been offered at
the temple, and the devotees also received a share.

Rākhāl sat by the Master and read about Lord Erskine from Self-Help by
Smiles.

MASTER (to M.): \"What does the book say?\"

M: \"It says that Lord Erskine performed his duty without desiring any
result for himself. Disinterested duty.\"

MASTER: \"That is very good. But the characteristic of a man of Perfect
Knowledge is that he doesn\'t keep a single book with him. He carries
all his Knowledge on the tip of his tongue. There\'s the instance of
Sukadeva. Books-I mean the scriptures-contain a mixture of sand and
sugar. The sādhu takes the sugar, leaving aside the sand. He takes only
the essence.\"

Vaishnavcharan, the musician, arrived and sang a few devotional songs.

M. spent the night in the nahabat.

**Sunday, December 16, 1883**

Sri Ramakrishna was seated with M. on the semicircular porch of his room
at about ten o\'clock in the morning. The fragrance of gardenias,
jasmines, oleanders, roses, and other flowers filled the air. The Master
was singing looking at M:

> *Thou must save me, sweetest Mother! Unto Thee I come for refuge,*
>
> *Helpless as a bird imprisoned in a cage.*
>
> *I have done unnumbered wrongs, and aimlessly I roam about,*
>
> *Misled by maya\'s spell, bereft of wisdom\'s light,*
>
> *Comfortless as a mother cow whose calf has wandered far away.*

MASTER: \"But why? Why should I live like a \'bird imprisoned in a
cage\'? Fie! For shame!\"

As the Master said these words he went into an ecstatic mood. His body
became motionless and his mind stopped functioning; tears streamed down
his cheeks. After a while he said, \"O Mother, make me like Sita,
completely forgetful of everything-body and limbs-, totally unconscious
of hands, feet, and sense-organs-only the one thought in her mind,
\'Where is Rāma?\' \"

Was the Master inspired by the ideal of Sita to teach M. the yearning
that a devotee should feel for God? Sita\'s very life was centred in
Rāma. Completely absorbed in the thought of Rāma, Sita forgot even the
body, which is so dear to all.

At four o\'clock in the afternoon Mr. Mukherji, a relative of
Prankrishna, arrived in the company of a brahmin well versed in the
scriptures.

MUKHERJI: \"I am very happy to meet you, sir.\"

MASTER: \"God dwells in all beings. He is the gold in all. In some
places it is more clearly manifest than in others. God dwells in the
worldly-minded, no doubt, but He is hidden there, like gold under deep
layers of clay.\"

MUKHERJI: \"Sir, what is the difference between worldly and
other-worldly things?\"

**Brahman and the world**

MASTER: \"While striving for the realization of God, the aspirant has to
practise renunciation, applying the logic of \'Neti, neti\'-\'Not this,
not this\', But after attaining the vision of God, he realizes that God
alone has become all things.

\"At one time Rāma was overpowered by the spirit of renunciation.
Dasaratha, worried at this, went to the sageVasishtha and begged him to
persuade Rāma not to give up the world. The sage came to Rāma and found
him in a gloomy mood. The fire of intense renunciation had been raging
in the Prince\'s mind. Vasishtha said: \'Rāma, why should You renounce
the world? Is the world outside God? Reason with me.\' Rāma realized
that the world had evolved from the Supreme Brahman. So, He said
nothing.

\"Buttermilk is made from the same substance as butter. One who realizes
this knows that butter goes with buttermilk and buttermilk with butter.
After separating the butter with great effort-that is to say, after
attaining Brahmajnana-you will realize that as long as butter exists,
buttermilk also must exist. Wherever there is butter there must be
buttermilk as well. As long as one feels that Brahman exists, one must
also be aware that the universe, living beings, and the twenty-four
cosmic principles exist as well.

**Nature of Brahman**

\"What Brahman is cannot be described in words. Everything has been
polluted, like food that has touched the tongue-that is, everything has
been described in words. But no one has been able to describe Brahman.
It is therefore unpolluted. I said this to Vidyasagar and he was
delighted.

\"But the Knowledge of Brahman cannot be realized if the aspirant is
worldly-minded even in the slightest degree. He succeeds in acquiring
this Knowledge only when his mind is totally free from \'woman and
gold\'. Parvati once said to Her father, \'Father, seek the company of
holy men if you want the Knowledge of Brahman.\' \"

Addressing Mr. Mukherji, Sri Ramakrishna said: \"You are rich, and still
you call on God. That is very good indeed. It is said in the Gitā that
those who fall from the path of yoga are born in their next birth as
devotees of God in rich families.\"

Mr. Mukherji quoted the line from the Gitā.

MASTER: \"God, if He so desires, can keep a Jnāni in the world too. The
world and all living beings have been created by His will. But He is
self-willed.\"

MUKHERJI (with a smile): \"How can God have any will? Does He lack
anything?\"

MASTER (with a smile): \"What\'s wrong in that? Water is water whether
it is still or in waves. The snake is a snake whether it is coiled up
motionless or wriggles along. A man is the same man whether sitting
still or engaged in action.

\"How can you eliminate from the Reality the universe and its living
beings? If you do that, It will lack Its full weight. You cannot find
out the total weight of the bel-fruit if you eliminate the seeds and
shell.

\"Brahman is unattached. One finds good and bad smells in the air, but
the air itself is untainted. Brahman and Śakti are identical. It is the
Primordial Power that has become the world and all living beings.\"

MUKHERJI: \"Why does one deviate from the path of yoga?\"

MASTER: \"As the saying goes: \'In my mother\'s womb I was in a state of
yoga; coming into the world, I have eaten its clay. The midwife has cut
one shackle, the navel cord; but how shall I cut the shackle of maya?\'

**\"Woman and gold\"**

\"Maya is nothing but \'woman\' and \'gold\'. A man attains yoga when he
has freed his mind from these two. The Self-the Supreme Self-is the
magnet; the individual self is the needle. The individual self
experiences the state of yoga when it is attracted by the Supreme Self
to Itself. But the magnet cannot attract the needle if the needle is
covered with clay; it can draw the needle only when the clay is removed.
The clay of \'woman\' and \'gold\' must be removed.\"

MUKHERJI: \"How can one remove it?\"

MASTER: \"Weep for God with a longing heart. Tears shed for Him will
wash away the clay. When you have thus freed yourself from impurity, you
will be attracted by the magnet. Only then will you attain yoga.\"

MUKHERJI: \"Priceless words!\"

MASTER: \"If a man is able to weep for God, he will see Him. He will go
into samādhi. Perfection in yoga is samādhi. A man achieves kumbhaka
without any yogic exercise if he but weeps for God. The next stage is
samādhi.

\"There is another method -that of meditation. In the Sahasrara, Śiva
manifests Himself in a special manner. The aspirant should meditate on
Him. The body is like a tray; the mind and buddhi are like water. The
Sun of Satchidananda is reflected in this water. Meditating on the
reflected sun, one sees the Real Sun through the grace of God.

\"But the worldly man must constantly live in the company of holy men.
It is necessary for all, even for sannyasis. But it is especially
necessary for the householder. His disease has become chronic because he
has to live constantly in the midst of \'woman and gold\'.\"

MUKHERJI: \"Yes, sir. The disease has indeed become chronic\"

MASTER: \"Give God the power of attorney. Let Him do whatever He wants.
Be like a kitten and cry to Him with a fervent heart. The mother cat
puts the kitten wherever she wants to. The kitten doesn\'t know
anything. It is left sometimes on the bed and sometimes near the
hearth.\"

MUKHERJI: \"It is good to read sacred books like the Gitā.\"

MASTER: \"But what will you gain by mere reading? Some have heard of
milk, some have seen it, and there are some, besides, who have drunk it.
God can indeed be seen; what is more, one can talk to Him.

**Different stages of spiritual progress**

\"The first stage is that of the beginner. He studies and hears. Second
is the stage of the struggling aspirant. He prays to God, meditates on
Him, and sings His name and glories. The third stage is that of the
perfect soul. He has seen God, realized Him directly and immediately in
his inner Consciousness. Last is the stage of the supremely perfect,
like Chaitanya. Such a devotee establishes a definite relationship with
God, looking on Him as his Son or Beloved.\"

M., Rākhāl , Jogin, Lātu, and the other devotees were entranced by these
words of divine realization.

Mr. Mukherji and his friend were taking leave of the Master. After
saluting him, they stood up. The Master also stood up to show them
courtesy.

MUKHERJI (smiling): \"That you should stand up or sit down!\"

MASTER (smiling): \"But what\'s the harm? Water is water whether it is
placid or in waves. I am like a cast-off leaf in the wind. The wind
blows that leaf wherever it lists. I am the machine and God is its
Operator.\"

Mr. Mukherji and his friend left the room. M. thought: \"According to
the Vedānta all is like a dream. Are all these-the ego, the universe,
and the living beings-unreal then?\"

M. had studied a little of the Vedānta. He also had read the German
philosophers, such as Kant and Hegel, whose writings are only a faint
echo of the Vedānta. But Sri Ramakrishna did not arrive at his
conclusions by reasoning, as do ordinary scholars. It was the Divine
Mother of the Universe who revealed the Truth to him. These were the
thoughts that passed through M.\'s mind.

A little later Sri Ramakrishna and M. were conversing on the porch west
of the Master\'s room. No one else was there. It was a late winter
afternoon, and the sun had not yet gone below the horizon.

**Is the world unreal?**

M: \"Is the world unreal?\"

MASTER: \"Why should it be unreal? What you are asking is a matter for
philosophical discussion.

\"In the beginning, when a man reasons following the Vedantic method of
\'Not this, not this\', he realizes that Brahman is not the living
beings, not the universe, not the twenty-four cosmic principles. All
these things become like dreams to him. Then comes the affirmation of
what has been denied, and he feels that God Himself has become the
universe and all living beings.

\"Suppose you are climbing to the roof by the stairs. As long as you are
aware of the roof, you are also aware of the stairs. He who is aware of
the high is also aware of the low. But after reaching the roof you
realize that the stairs are made of the same materials-brick, lime, and
brick-dust-as the roof.

\"Further, I have given the illustration of the bel-fruit. Both
changeability and unchangeability belong to one and the same Reality.

\"The ego cannot be done away with. As long as \'I-consciousness\'
exists, living beings and the universe must also exist. After realizing
God, one sees that, it is He Himself who has become the universe and the
living beings. But one cannot realize this by mere reasoning.

\"Śiva has two states of mind. First, the state of samādhi, when He is
transfixed in the Great Yoga. He is then

Ātmārāma, satisfied in the Self. Second, the state when He descends from
samādhi and keeps a trace of ego. Then He dances about, chanting,
\'Rāma, Rāma!\'\"

Did the Master describe Śiva to hint at his own state of mind?

It was evening. Sri Ramakrishna was meditating on the Divine Mother and
chanting Her holy name. The devotees also went off to solitary places
and meditate on their Chosen Ideals. Evening worship began at the temple
garden in the shrines of Kāli, Radha-Krishna, and Śiva.

It was the second day of the dark fortnight of the moon. Soon the moon
rose in the sky, bathing temples, trees, flowers, and the rippling
surface of the Ganges in its light. The Master was sitting on the couch
and M. on the floor. The conversation turned to the Vedānta.

MASTER (to M.): \"Why should the universe be unreal? That is a
speculation of the philosophers. After realizing God, one sees that it
is God Himself who has become the universe and all living beings.

**Divine Mother is the Universal Consciousness**

\"The Divine Mother revealed to me in the Kāli temple that it was She
who had become everything. She showed me that everything was full of
Consciousness. The Image was Consciousness, the altar was Consciousness,
the water-vessels were Consciousness, the door-sill was Consciousness,
the marble floor was Consciousness-all was Consciousness.

\"I found everything inside the room soaked, as it were, in Bliss-the
Bliss of Satchidananda. I saw a wicked man in front of the Kāli temple;
but in him also I saw the Power of the Divine Mother vibrating.

\"That was why I fed a cat with the food that was to be offered to the
Divine Mother. I clearly perceived that the Divine Mother Herself had
become everything-even the cat. The manager of the temple garden wrote
to Mathur Babu saying that I was feeding the cat with the offering
intended for the Divine Mother. But Mathur Babu had insight into the
state of my mind. He wrote back to the manager: \'Let him do whatever he
likes. You must not say anything to him.\'

\"After realizing God, one sees all this aright-that it is He who has
become the universe, living beings, and the twenty-four cosmic
principles. But what remains when God completely effaces the ego cannot
be described in words. As Ramprasad said in one of his songs, \'Then
alone will you know whether you are good or I am good!\' I get into even
that state now and then.

\"A man sees a thing in one way through reasoning and in an altogether
different way when God Himself shows it to him.\"

**Monday, December 17, 1883**

It was about eight o\'clock in the morning. Sri Ramakrishna was in his
room with M., when Dr. Madhu arrived and sat down beside the Master on
the small couch. He was an elderly man and full of wit. He used to visit
the Master when the latter felt indisposed.

MASTER: \"The whole thing, in a nutshell is that one must develop
ecstatic love for Satchidananda. What kind of love? How should one love
God? Gauri used to say that one must become like Sita to understand
Rāma; like Bhagavati, the Divine Mother, to understand Bhagavan, Śiva.
One must practise austerity, as Bhagavati did, in order to attain Śiva.
One must cultivate the attitude of Prakriti in order to realize
Purusha-the attitude of a friend, a handmaid, or a mother.

\"I saw Sita in a vision. I found that her entire mind was concentrated
on Rāma. She was totally indifferent to everything-her hands, her feet,
her clothes, her jewels. It seemed that Rāma had filled every bit of her
life and she could not remain alive without Rāma.\"

M: \"Yes, sir. She was mad with love for Rāma.\"

MASTER: \"Mad! That\'s the word. One must become mad with love in order
to realize God. But that love is not possible if the mind dwells on
\'woman and gold\'. Sex-life with a woman! What happiness is there in
that? The realization of God gives ten million times more happiness.
Gauri used to say that when a man attains ecstatic love of God all the
pores of the skin, even the roots of the hair, become like so many
sexual organs, and in every pore the aspirant enjoys the happiness of
communion with the Ātman.

\"One must call on God with a longing heart. One must learn from the
guru how God can be realized. Only if the guru himself has attained
Perfect Knowledge can he show the way.

\"A man, gets rid of all desires when he has Perfect Knowledge. He
becomes like a child five years old. Sages like Dattatreya and
Jadabharata had the nature of a child.\"

M: \"One hears about them. But there were many others like them that the
world doesn\'t hear about.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. The Jnāni gets rid of all desire if any is left, it does
not hurt him. At the touch of the philosopher\'s stone the sword is
transformed into gold. Then that sword cannot do any killing. Just so,
the Jnāni keeps only a semblance of anger and passion. They are anger
and passion only in name and cannot injure him.\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. The Jnāni goes beyond the three gunas, as you say. He is
    not under the control of any of the gunas-sattva, rajas, or tamas.
    All these three are so many robbers, as it were.\"

MASTER: \"Yes, one must assimilate that.\"

M: \"In this world there are perhaps not more than three or four men of
Perfect Knowledge.\"

MASTER: \"Why do you say that? One sees many holy men and sannyasis in
the monasteries of upper India.\"

M: \"Well, I too can become a sannyasi like one of those.\"

The Master fixed his gaze on M. and said, \"By renouncing everything?\"

1.  \"What can a man achieve unless he gets rid of maya? What will a man
    gain by merely being a sannyasi, if he cannot subdue maya?\"

Both remained silent a few minutes.

M: \"Sir, what is the nature of the divine love transcending the three
gunas?\"

MASTER: \"Attaining that love, the devotee sees everything full of
Spirit and Consciousness. To him \'Krishna is Consciousness, and His
sacred Abode is also Consciousness\'. The devotee, too, is
Consciousness. Everything is Consciousness. Very few people attain such
love.\"

DR. MADHU: \"The love transcending the three gunas means, in other
words, that the devotee is not under the control of any of the gunas.\"

MASTER (smiling): \"Yes, that\'s it. He becomes like a child five years
old, not under the control of any of the gunas.\"

The Master was resting after his noon meal. Mani Mallick arrived and
saluted him. Sri Ramakrishna remained lying on the couch and said a word
or two to Mani.

MANI: \"I hear you visited Keshab Sen.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. How is he now?\"

MANI: \"He hasn\'t recovered to any extent from his illness.\"

MASTER: \"I found him to be very rajasic. I had to wait a long time
before I could see him.\"

The Master sat up on the couch and continued his conversation with the
devotees.

MASTER (to M.): \"I became mad for Rāma. I used to walk about carrying
an image of Ramlala given to me by a monk. I bathed it, fed it, and laid
it down to sleep. I carried it wherever I went. I became mad for
Ramlala.\"

> **\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--**

**Chapter 17**

M. AT DAKSHINESWAR (I)

> Tuesday, December 18, 1883

SRI RAMAKRISHNA was seated in his room with his devotees. He spoke
highly of Devendranath Tagore\'s love of God and renunciation, and then
said, pointing to Rākhāl and the other young devotees, \"Devendra is a
good man; but blessed indeed are those young aspirants who, like
Sukadeva, practise renunciation from their very boyhood and think of God
day and night without being involved in worldly life.

**Nature of worldly people**

\"The worldly man always has some desire or other, though at times he
shows much devotion to God. Once Mathur Babu was entangled in a lawsuit.
He said to me in the shrine of Kāli, \'Sir, please offer this flower to
the Divine Mother.\' I offered it unsuspectingly, but he firmly believed
that he would attain his objective if I offered the flower.

\"What devotion Rati\'s mother had! How often she used to come here and
how much she served me! She was a Vaishnava. One day she noticed that I
ate the food offered at the Kāli temple, and that stopped her coming.
Her devotion to God was one-sided. It isn\'t possible to understand a
person right away.\"

It was a winter morning, and the Master was sitting near the east door
of his room, wrapped in his moleskin shawl. He looked at the sun and
suddenly went into samādhi. His eyes stopped blinking and he lost all
consciousness of the outer world. After a long time he came down to the
plane of the sense world. Rākhāl , Hazra, M., and other devotees were
seated near him.

MASTER (to Hazra): \"The state of samādhi is certainly inspired by love.
Once, at Syambazar, they arranged a kirtan at Natavar Goswami\'s house.
There I had a vision of Krishna and the gopis of Vrindāvan. I felt that
my subtle body was walking at Krishna\'s heels.

\"I went into samādhi when similar devotional songs were sung at the
Hari Sabha in Jorashanko in Calcutta. That day they feared I might give
up the body.\"

After the Master had finished his bath, he again spoke of the ecstatic
love of the gopis. He said to M. and the other devotees: \"One should
accept the fervent attachment of the gopis to their beloved Krishna.
Sing songs like this:

> *Tell me, friend, how far is the grove*
>
> *Where Krishna, my Beloved, dwells?*
>
> *His fragrance reaches me even here;*
>
> *But I am tired and can walk no farther.\"*

Again he sang:

> *I am not going home, O friend,*
>
> *For there it is hard for me to chant my Krishna\'s name. . . .*

Sri Ramakrishna had vowed to offer green coconut and sugar to
Siddhesvari, the Divine Mother, for Rākhāl \'s welfare. He asked M.
whether he would pay for the offerings.

That afternoon the Master, accompanied by M., Rākhāl , and some other
devotees, set out in a carriage for the temple of Siddhesvari in
Calcutta. On the way the offerings were purchased. On reaching the
temple, the Master asked the devotees to offer the fruit and sugar to
the Divine Mother. They saw the priests and their friends playing cards
in the temple. Sri Ramakrishna said: \"To play cards in a temple! One
should think of God here.\"

From the temple the Master went to Jadu Mallick\'s house. Jadu was
surrounded by his admirers, well-dressed dandies. He welcomed the
Master.

MASTER ((with a smile): \"Why do you keep so many clowns and flatterers
with you?\"

JADU (smiling): \"That you may liberate them.\" (Laughter.)

MASTER: \"Flatterers think that the rich man will loosen his
purse-strings for them. But it is very difficult to get anything from
him. Once a jackal saw a bullock and would not give up his company. The
bullock roamed about and the jackal followed him. The jackal thought:
\'There hang the bullock\'s testicles. Some time or other they will drop
to the ground and I shall eat them.\' When the bullock slept on the
ground, the jackal lay down too, and when the bullock moved about, the
jackal followed him. Many days passed in this way, but the bullock\'s
testicles still clung to his body. The jackal went away disappointed.
(All laugh.) That also happens to flatterers.\"

Jadu and his mother served refreshments to Sri Ramakrishna and the
devotees.

**Wednesday, December 19, 1883**

It was nine o\'clock in the morning. Sri Ramakrishna was talking to M.
near the bel-tree at Dakshineswar. This tree, under which the Master had
practised the most austere sadhana, stood in the northern end of the
temple garden. Farther north ran a high wall, and just outside was the
government magazine. West of the bel-tree was a row of tall pines that
rustled in the wind. Below the trees flowed the Ganges, and to the south
could be seen the sacred grove of the Panchavati. The dense trees and
underbrush hid the temples. No noise of the outside world reached the
bel-tree.

MASTER (to M.): \"But one cannot realize God without renouncing \'woman
and gold\'.\"

M: \"Why? Did not Vasishtha say to Rāma, \'O Rāma, You may renounce the
world if the world is outside God\'?\"

MASTER (smiling): \"He said that to Rāma so that Rāma might destroy
Ravana. Rāma accepted the life of a householder and married to fulfil
that mission.\"

M. stood there like a log, stunned and speechless.

Sri Ramakrishna went to the Panchavati on his way back to his room. M.
accompanied him. It was then about ten o\'clock.

**Path of the Impersonal God**

M: \"Sir, is there no spiritual discipline leading to realization of the
Impersonal God?\"

MASTER: \"Yes, there is. But the path is extremely difficult. After
intense austerities the rishis of olden times realized God as their
inner most consciousness and experienced the real nature of Brahman. But
how hard they had to work! They went out of their dwellings in the early
morning and all day practised austerities and meditation. Returning home
at nightfall, they took a light supper of fruit and roots.

\"But an aspirant cannot succeed in this form of spiritual discipline if
his mind is stained with worldliness even in the slightest degree. The
mind must withdraw totally from all objects of form, taste, smell,
touch, and sound. Only thus does it become pure. The Pure Mind is the
same as the Pure Ātman. But such a mind must be altogether free from
\'woman and gold\'. When it becomes pure, one has another experience.
One realizes: \'God alone is the Doer, and I am His instrument.\' One
does not feel oneself to be absolutely necessary to others either in
their misery or in their happiness.

\"Once a wicked man beat into unconsciousness a monk who lived in a
monastery. On regaining consciousness he was asked by his friends, \'Who
is feeding you milk?\' The monk said, \'He who beat me is now feeding
me.\' \"

M: \"Yes, sir. I know that story.\"

**Obstacles to samādhi**

MASTER: \"It is not enough to know it. One must assimilate its meaning.
It is the thought of worldly objects that prevents the mind from going
into samādhi. One becomes established in samādhi when one is completely
rid of worldliness. It is possible for me to give up the body in
samādhi; but I have a slight desire to enjoy the love of God and the
company of His devotees. Therefore I pay a little attention to my body.

\"There is another kind of samādhi, called unmana samādhi. One attains
it by suddenly gathering the dispersed mind. You understand what that
is, don\'t you?\"

M: \"Yes, sir.\"

MASTER: \"Yes. It is the sudden withdrawal of the dispersed mind to the
Ideal. But that samādhi does not last long. Worldly thoughts intrude and
destroy it. The yogi slips down from his yoga.

\"At Kamarpukur I have seen the mongoose living in its hole up in the
wall. It feels snug there. Sometimes people tie a brick to its tail;
then the pull of the brick makes it come out of its hole. Every time the
mongoose tries to be comfortable inside the hole, it has to come out
because of the pull of the brick. Such is the effect of brooding on
worldly objects that it makes the yogi stray from the path of yoga.

\"Worldly people may now and then experience samādhi.

its petals close again when the sun is covered by a cloud.

The lotus blooms, no doubt, when the sun is up; but Worldly thought is
the cloud.\"

M: \"Isn\'t it possible to develop both jnāna and bhakti by the practice
of spiritual discipline?\"

MASTER: \"Through the path of bhakti a man may attain them both. If it
is necessary, God gives him the Knowledge of Brahman. But a highly
qualified aspirant may develop both jnāna and bhakti at the same time.
Such is the case with the Isvarakotis-Chaitanya for example. But the
case of ordinary devotees is different.

\"There are five kinds of light: the light of a lamp, the light of
various kinds of fire, the light of the moon, the light of the sun, and
lastly the combined light of the sun and the moon. Bhakti is the light
of the moon, and jnāna the light of the sun.

\"Sometimes it is seen that the sun has hardly set when the moon rises
in the sky. In an Incarnation of God one sees, at the same time, the sun
of Knowledge and the moon of Love.

\"Can everyone, by the mere wish, develop Knowledge and Love at the same
time? It depends on the person. One bamboo is more hollow than another.
Is it possible for all to comprehend the nature of God? Can a one seer
pot hold five seers of milk?\"

M: \"But what about the grace of God? Through His grace a camel can pass
through the eye of a needle.\"

MASTER: \"But is it possible to obtain God\'s grace just like that? A
beggar may get a penny, if he asks for it.

But suppose he asks you right off for his train fare: How about that?\"

M. stood silent. The Master, too, remained silent. Suddenly he said:
\"Yes, it is true. Through the grace of God some may get both jnāna and
bhakti.\"

M. saluted the Master and went back to the bel-tree.

At midday, finding that M. had not yet returned, Sri Ramakrishna started
toward the bel-tree; but on reaching the Panchavati he met M. carrying
his prayer carpet and water-jug. M. saluted the Master.

Sri Ramakrishna said to M: \"I was coming to look for you. Because of
your delay I thought you might have

scaled the wall and run away. I watched your eyes this morning and felt
apprehensive lest you should go away like Narayan Shastri. Then I said
to myself: \'No, he won\'t run away. He thinks a great deal before doing
anything.\' \"

The same night the Master talked to M., Rākhāl , Lātu, Harish, and a few
other devotees.

MASTER (to M.): \"Some people give a metaphysical interpretation of the
Vrindāvan episode of Sri Krishna\'s life. What do you say about it?\"

1.  \"There are various opinions. What if there are? You have told us
    the story of Bhishmadeva\'s weeping, on his bed of arrows, because
    he could not understand anything of God\'s ways.

\"Again, you have told us that Hanuman used to say: \'I don\'t know any
thing about the day of the week, the position of the stars, and so
forth. I only meditate on Rāma.\'

\"Further, you have said to us that in the last analysis there are two
things only. Brahman and Its Power. You have also said that, after the
attainment of Brahmajnana, a man realizes these two to be One, the One
that has no two\"

MASTER: \"Yes, that is true. Your ideal is to reach the goal. You may
reach it by going either through a thorny forest or along a good road.

\"Diverse opinions certainly exist. Nangta used to say that the monks
could not be feasted because of the diversity of their views. Once a
feast was arranged for the sannyasis. Monks belonging to many sects were
invited. Everyone claimed that his sect should be fed first, but no
conclusion could be arrived at. At last they all went away and the food
had to be given to the prostitutes.\"

M: \"Totapuri was indeed a great soul.\"

MASTER: \"But Hazra says he was an ordinary man. There\'s no use in
discussing these things. Everyone says that his watch alone gives the
correct time.

\"You see, Narayan Shastri developed a spirit of intense renunciation.
He was a great scholar. He gave up his wife and went away. A man attains
yoga when he completely effaces \'woman and gold\' from his mind. With
some, the characteristics of the yogi are well marked.

\"I shall have to tell you something of the six centres. The mind of the
yogi passes through these, and he realizes God through His grace. Have
you heard of the six centres?\"

M: \"These are the \'seven planes\' of the Vedānta.\"

MASTER: \"Not the Vedānta, but the Vedas. Do you know what the six
centres are like? They are the \'lotuses\' in the subtle body. The yogis
see them. They are like the fruits and leaves of a wax tree.\"

1.  \"Yes, sir. The yogis can perceive them. I have read that there is a
    kind of glass through which a tiny object looks very big. Likewise,
    through yoga one can see those subtle lotuses.\"

Following Sri Ramakrishna\'s direction, M. spent the night in the hut at
the Panchavati. In the early hours of the morning he was singing alone:

> *I am without the least benefit of prayer and austerity, O Lord!*
>
> *I am the lowliest of the lowly; make me pure with Thy hallowed
> touch.*
>
> *One by one I pass my days in hope of reaching Thy Lotus Feet,*
>
> *But Thee, alas, I have not found. . . .*

Suddenly M. glanced toward the window and saw the Master standing there.
Sri Ramakrishna\'s eyes became heavy with tears as M. sang the line:

> *I am the lowliest of the lowly; make me pure with Thy hallowed
> touch.*

M. sang again:

1.  *shall put on the ochre robe and ear-rings made of conch-shell;
    > Thus, in the garb of a yogini, from place to place I shall wander,
    > Till I have found my cruel Hari. . . .*

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  saw that the Master was walking with Rākhāl .

**Friday, December 21, 1883**

In the morning the Master and M. were conversing alone under the
bel-tree. The Master told him many secrets of spiritual discipline,
exhorting him to renounce \"woman and gold\". He further said that the
mind at times becomes one\'s guru.

After his midday meal the Master went to the Panchavati wearing a
beautiful yellow robe. Two or three Vaishnava monks were there, clad in
the dress of their sect.

In the afternoon a monk belonging to the sect of Nanak arrived. He was a
worshipper of the formless God. Sri Ramakrishna asked him to meditate as
well on God with form. The Master said to him: \"Dive deep; one does not
get the precious gems by merely floating on the surface. God is without
form, no doubt; but He also has form. By meditating on God with form one
speedily acquires devotion; then one can meditate on the formless God.
It is like throwing a letter away, after learning its contents, and then
setting out to follow its instructions.\"

